start question
auto-insurance
What Does Car Insurance Lapse Mean ?
A lapse in coverage is what is meant , meaning that the policy is cancelled . This can occur for many reasons such as non payment of premium on the part of the insured or the cancellation or non renewal pf the policy by the insurance company . A lapse in coverage will , in many states , be reported to the Department of Motor Vehicles and may result in a fine and the suspension of the car 's registration .
An auto insurance lapse means that under the terms and conditions of the policy , coverage provided by that policy is discontinued . Typically , a policy lapses for non payment of premium . Coverage can be discontinued for other reasons , for example , if an insured decides to cancel the policy or , conversley , if the company decides to non-renew because the risk no longer meets the company 's guidlines as filed with the state Insurance Department . The State of CT , and many others , require that liability coverage be in force as a condition of the registration of a car . Thus , if a car insurance policy lapses , and the state DMV therefore is notified , the result could be a fine or suspention of the car 's registration or both . Likewise , many car insurance companies will not offer coverage for those who have not maintained continuous coverage . In a case such as that , the car ower would end up being offered coverage usually in a non-standard company at a much higher premium .
This can be different state by state , but I can advise regarding Connecticut . If you let your car insurance lapse here , a couple of things will occur . First , because the CT Department of Motor Vehicles requires by law that anyone who registers a car here must have and maintain car insurance , such a lapse can cause you serious problems down the line . Here , insurance companies and DMV share information so when a policy lapses , DMV is notified by your insurance company . DMV will send a letter requiring you to provide proof that coverage was maintained and if you can not provide such proof , regardless ofhow long the lapse , you will be fairly heavily fined . Secondly , when you do decide to establish car insurance again , you may find that it will cost you more than it did before the lapse . This is because companies have underwriting requirements that stipulate that one must maintain continuous coverage for at least the previous 6 monthsin order to qualify for standard rating . If that can not be proven , you will end up with a higher risk carrier for at least 6 months and will pay a much higher premium that you have been used to paying .
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
When a life insurance policy lapses , it means that the policy is no longer in effect . If death occurred while having a lapsed policy , the life insurance policy would not pay out . You also lose the right to convert a Term policy to Permanent after it lapses . For Term life insurance , if you get behind in payments , you have one month to catch up to keep your policy in effect . If the policy does lapse , you may be able to reinstate it by filling out paperwork and catching up the premium . However , your health can not have had any substantial change to get that policy back . If you have had a decline in health , you may need to apply for new coverage .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
If you mean can you cancel or change your car insurance , then the answer is yes , any time you like . Now , keep in mind that in most if not all states , you are required to have and maintain continuous car insurance that at least provides liability coverage in order to register a car . So , can you cancel your car insurance ? Yes , but unless you replace that coverage without any lapse , you may be in danger of being severly fined or at worst , have your car 's registration cancelled .
A lapse in coverage is what is meant , meaning that the policy is cancelled . This can occur for many reasons such as non payment of premium on the part of the insured or the cancellation or non renewal pf the policy by the insurance company . A lapse in coverage will , in many states , be reported to the Department of Motor Vehicles and may result in a fine and the suspension of the car 's registration .
A lapse in auto insurance means you went without auto insurance for a certain period of time . In many states this is a factor for rating purposes . The lapse is viewed as a time your driving record could not be verified which could potentially cause you to have higher rates . Never let your auto insurance lapse ifpossible There are exceptions such as military service that are taken into consideration .
When life insurance lapses , the coverage ends . If the insured person would pass away after the policy lapses , there would be no death benefit paid to the beneficiary . There is a 30 day grace period after the premium is due , where you can pay the premium and keep the policy from lapsing . Once it is lapsed , it must be reinstated or you need to apply for a new policy . To avoid your policy from lapsing , be sure to keep your life insurance company apprised of any change in address -LRB- if your statements are mailed to you -RRB- or change of banks -LRB- if your premium is paid by automatic withdrawal -RRB- .
When a life insurance policy lapses , it means that the policy would no longer pay the death benefit if death of the insured person would occur . Policies lapse due to non-payment ; whether by accident or on purpose . When the policy lapses , there is usually a chance to reinstate it by filling out some paperwork and making up for the missed premium . However , reinstatement requires that the insured person 's health has not changed from the health rating it was when the policy was originally purchased . If unable to qualify for reinstatement a new policy will be needed .
Cancellations for non payment of premium may be able to be reinstated , provided that there has not been a history of such cancellations . Here in Connecticut , even if reinstated , they may be processed with a lapse in coverage . If that occurs , you will eventually receive a fine from the CT DMV covering that lapsed period as maintaining car insurance is required by law . If your car insurance is cancelled mid term or non renewed as a result of a serious infraction , you will be notified well in advance of that action so you can either remedy the cause , or obtain other , probably more expensive , coverage to avoid an even more costly lapse in coverage .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Really nothing happens when a life insurance policy lapses . That is to say the policy ends and there is no more insurance . There are a couple things that should happen = you should be notified that the policy is going to lapse and it should be explained how you can prevent that from happening . If the premiums are not paid up to keep the policy in force and it does lapse you should be notified of the provision to reinstate the policy and what steps to take and the time limit within which they must be taken .
If your life insurance policy lapses , it means that your coverage has ended . In order to reinstate it , you will have to prove that your health has not changed . If that is not possible , you will have to get a new policy with new rates . In my experience , the most common reason for a policy lapsing is people moving and forgetting to tell the life insurance company their new address . This is most common if paying annually , as the post office forwarding period may not catch the notice . To avoid your policy lapsing , be sure to keep your current address and checking account on file at the insurance company . Many companies will allow you to set up a secondary address to which notices can also be sent . If you use online banking , set a warning if your life insurance premium is not paid . Treat your life insurance payment as you would or mortgage or auto loan payment . Especially if you are getting older or have had a change of health since you first purchased your policy , protecting you policy will be worth it .
If your car insurance lapses ... pay that bill ! Often , you have time where the insurer will accept your premium payment -LRB- but possibly with a lapse incoverage -RRB- . If your policy has lapsed for a longer period of time , obtaining a new policy quickly is important . You should contact an experienced broker or a very reputable website with the idea of getting coverage that day . After reviewing multiple quotes , you can apply and purchase a policy -LRB- online , if you wish -RRB- .
In most cases yes . Depending on the reason for the lapse and the term of the lapse many carriers will allow the policy to be re-instated . Normally the lapse term can not be more than 30 days . If you have had a lapse in your coverage and want to see about getting the policy re-instated contact your local agent , they are the front and rear line when it comes to your coverage . They can help you get your insurance coverage back on track .
Yes , many people lapse their life insurance policies . It comes from failure to pay enough premium to keep it in force . Most people buy term life insurance for a level premium for 20-years or so . At the 21st year they COULD pay more and keep it going but hardly anyone ever would because the premium at that time would be very high . So the policy will usually lapse . Any type of policy can lapse if you do n't pay the premium but term is designed to lapse once you do n't need it anymore .
No . The guaranteed side simply means the coverage is guaranteed to remain in effect until that point as long as the premiums are continued to be paid at their current rate - as universal life insurance is defined as flexible premium coverage , you have the option to increase the premium you 're paying to extend the guarantee side . The current side determines when the coverage would actually run out - however , the current side is always subject to change as it reflects whatever the current interest rates are . If the interest rates change , then the current side will change as well . In addition , if the carrier raises their costs of insurance charges under the policy , then the cash value can be depleted even faster thus lowering the current side coverage projection even further . If you 're unsure what you have , you can contact the carrier to send you an up-to-date illustration -LRB- a coverage projection citing how long the coverage will remain in force based on today 's figures -RRB- . It sounds to me as though the policy that you have is a current assumption universal life program rather than a guaranteed universal life program -LRB- which can guarantee premiums remain fixed and guaranteed up to age 121 -RRB- . Current assumption policies typically have limited guarantees under their programs and require additional premiums if the cash value is depleted - meaning they will `` crash '' if the cash value hits $ 0 -LRB- you would therefore need to pay more in premiums above what you 're already spending to keep the coverage going or else it will lapse -RRB- . Guaranteed universal life policies state that even if the cash value hits $ 0 , the coverage will still continue as long as your regularly scheduled premiums are paid . If you prefer to have something that guarantees coverage for life rather than risking coverage lapsing after age 75 , you may want to consider setting up a guaranteed universal life policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance policyholders do n't lapse per se , but life insurance policies do . When a life insurance premium bill is received , there is a stated due date for the premium . The life insurance company then provides an additional 30 days past the due date before the policy lapses . Technically , coverage stops at the end of the 30 day lapse period if no premium is paid . After the lapse period , there is a 30 day reinstatement period , in which there is no coverage , but the missed premiums can be paid to put the policy back in-force . If premiums are not paid during the reinstatement period , the only way to continue coverage is to go back through medical underwriting .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Why Is Home Insurance So Expensive In Wisconsin ?
Rates for homeowners insurance policies are based on the risk exposure and claims activity that a carrier has experienced . Almost all carriers within the United States have experienced an increase in premiums over the years due to the number of claims payouts from covered claims caused natural disasters and other covered incidents . I have seen questions from people all across the country that are asking about the cause of insurance premium increases . It is truely the unfortunate side effect of insurance that attempts to spread the financial risk across the many .
There are several different reasons home insurance rates increase . Most carriers would probably tell you that at least a portion of their increases are linked to weather/natural disaster related claims increases over the past few years . I often hear from clients in Wisconsin -LRB- our location -RRB- thinking they should not have to pay more for insurance due to the carrier having more lossesfrom fires out west , or hurricanes on the coast.Clients say they did not have a claim so why should they pay more?This debate will rage on but I doubt much will change . Insurance carriers are a business and when they pay out more in claims , due to bad weather or what have you , they have to make up for the difference ; increasing premiums . They spread risk around to remain competetive , trying to balance out higher risk states/locationswith lower risk states/locations . Average premiums on a state to state level often reflect this -LRB- for example , Florida is often ranked number one for premium cost primarily due to the high risk of weather related claims -RRB- . Another common reason carriers provide for increasing prmeiumsis to keep pace with inflation , many policies offer inflation guard to keep pace with estimated values . What is the take away here ? Home insurance is WORTH IT ! Protect your home and investment , likely your most expensive one ! Talk to an independent agent today !
In Wisconsin Rural Mutual Insurance Company which is a part of Farm Bureau Financial Services offers renters insurance . I can only speak for Wisconsin , but Farm Bureau Financial Services does operate in other states within the United States and handles personal lines with other companies in those states . If you are in Wisconsin give me a call and I can try to help you with coverage if you are not in Wisconsin , then I would suggest contacting your local Farm Bureau office to ask them for a local agent .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
As of July 2013 the average car insurance policy in the United States cost $ 964 per year . In Wisconsin the average policy cost $ 770 . So yes , on average , auto insurance appears to b cheaper in Wisconsin . Keep in mind that these are averages and your individual circumstances may result in higher or lower rates in Wisconsin .
NML began as the entrepreneurial vision of `` General '' John C. Johnston , of Catskill , New York . He moved to Wisconsin in 1854 and started the Mutual Life Insurance Company of the State of Wisconsin in 1957 . Samuel Daggett was one of a group of businessmen who acquired the Mutual Life Insurance Company of the State of Wisconsin , moved it from Janesville to Milwaukee , and built it into Northwester Mutual Life Insurance Company in 1959 .
Each homeowners policy is different , but most do have some limited coverage for jewelry . Look over your policy or contact your agent to find out exactly what coverage is provided . I service auto , home , commercial , and farm lines in Wisconsin . Please feel free to contact me if you live in Wisconsin and would like to hear what my company has to offer .
To buy life insurance in Wisconsin , you can visit an agency that you find in the Yellow Pages , or you can shop from home on the internet . To see which websites offer life insurance in Wisconsin , put in your state in a free quote engine and see if it brings up a quote for you . Then you can contact them by phone or email if you like the quote or want to discuss your options .
There are several ways to achieve this . You could keep a notebook with a list of all your personal items . You could keep the list electronicly in a format such as Word or Excel . There are also several home inventory softwares available out there for free or paid . The more detail you keep about the items that you own the quicker and truer the claims process will be . If you are in Wisconsin , I have a link on my business Facebook page to an inventory software that is free that was posted on insurance commissioners website for the state of Wisconsin . Feel free to like my page and check out the software .
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
Auto insurance is mandatory in the state of Wisconsin under the financial responsibility act . This requires all drivers in the state of Wisconsin to care a minimum 25/50/10 coverages and uninsured motorist coverage of 25/50 . If you are pulled over by the police and are unable to provide proof of insurance you will more than likely be issued a ticket .
As of today according to the Wisconsin Department of Transportation website there is not a requirement to show proof of insurance when registering a vehicle . Please do remember that Wisconsin does require all drivers to have an active automobile insurance policy with state statute minimum requirements . D.O.T. requirements can change . I would recommend either confirming the requirements on the state 's D.O.T. website or calling the local D.O.T. office .
As Mr. Harris indicates , car insurance is mandatory in all States . Mandatory auto insurance limits vary by State , however . The specific limits for your State can be found on your particular State 's Insurance Commissioner website or by simply searching the web for auto liability limits , with the name of your State . Limits vary from $ 10,000 / $ 20,000 / $ 10,000 in Florida -LRB- Yikes ! -RRB- to $ 50,000 / $ 100,000 / $ 55,000 in Wisconsin . The first two dollar amounts are for bodily injury from an accident and the third amount is for property damage to others , from that accident . For example : Using Wisconsin limits , In an insured driver 's liability situation , the policy would pay no more than $ 50,000 to any one injured person but no more than $ 100,000 , no matter how many people were injured . So , if three people were injured and two of them received $ 50,000 each , the third injured person would not be collecting from the policy , since the $ 100,000 limit would have been exhausted . As for the property damage to others , the policy would pay no more than $ 55,000 in total to one or more claimants . .
Like Tom , I can provide information for the state the I am licensed in which is Wisconsin . As of this point Wisconsin does not require proof of insurance when registering a vehicle of getting your license unless you have had incidents on your MVR then an SR-22 may be required . If you have had a lapse in coverage you will more than likely have to secure coverage with a carrier that accepts higher risk clients and pay a higher premium .
I can only speak for Wisconsin as that is the only state that I am currently licensed in . Wisconsin to the best of my knowledge as of this date requires liability coverage only for licensed drivers . This means bodily injury , property damage , uninsured motorist , and under-insured motorist . Medical payments currently is not a required coverage but clients must sign a document to opt out this coverage . All of these coverage must meet the states minimum coverage amount also . Contact a local agent to find out more about the coverage requirements within your state and the pricing associated with them .
If you have found that life insurance is expensive in Wisconsin , it is probably due to one or more of several reasons : 1 -RRB- You are an older person . The younger you are , the cheaper life insurance is , when other factors are comparable . 2 -RRB- You smoke . Tobacco rates often run three times nontobacco rates . 3 -RRB- You have a health condition . Health can make a big impact on life insurance premiums . 4 -RRB- You are buying permanent insurance . The longer you lock in the rate , generally , the more it costs . But then you do not have to purchase a new policy at an older age , when the short term policy runs out . 5 -RRB- You do not have a selection of policies from which to choose . Using a broker can help you get the lowest cost .
Medica started in 1975 by a group of physicians for the purpose of becoming a Physicians Health Plan . They offer coverage in Minnesota and select counties in Wisconsin , North Dakota and South Dakota . According to Medica , `` It was the first open-access health plan in the state . In 1991 , PHP merged with Share to become Medica . And in 1994 , Medica merged with HealthSpan to form Allina Health System , an integrated organization offering both health care coverage and medical services . Medica became an independent health plan in 2001 '' . In 2010 , Medica reported $ 4 Billion in revenue and that `` 90 % of fully insured premium revenue was used to pay for health care expenses '' . Medica states that over 96 % of Minnesota 's providers participate in the program and they offer a large national network of over 660,000 providers and 5,100 hospitals to it 's members . Resources : Medica.com
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
According to the Wisconsin Department of Motor Vehicles Website fines regarding insurance are as follows : Operating a motor vehicle without insurance may result in a fine of up to $ 500 . Drivers and owners who fail to show proof of insurance at the time of the stop/accident may be fined up to $ 10 . Offering proof of insurance that is found to be fraudulent may result in a fine of up to $ 5,000 .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Is The Beneficiary In Life Insurance ?
The beneficiary in a life insurance policy is the person or entity that will receive the death benefit when the insured person passes away . The primary beneficiary is the first person in line for the death benefit . The contingent beneficiary would receive the life insurance proceeds if the primary beneficiary is not alive .
Life insurance is used to protect family members , business associates or charitable organizations of the policy insured from financial liabilities and future obligations . If the event that the policy insured dies death benefit proceeds are paid to the policy beneficiaries like family members , business associates , charitable organizations and even irrevocable life insurance trusts .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
Of course ! You have the option to put on primary beneficiaries , contingent beneficiaries -LRB- in case the primary predeceases the insured -RRB- , and even tertiary beneficiaries if you 'd like -LRB- in case the primary and contingent beneficiaries predecease the insured -RRB- . Each level -LRB- primary , contingent , and tertiary -RRB- can have more than one beneficiary . You also want to make sure to designate what happens to a beneficiary 's share if he/she predeceases the insured -LRB- especially if there is more than 1 beneficiary - e.g. does it go to the other beneficiary ? to the estate ? to someone else ? etc. -RRB- The other thing you want to make sure of is that the policy structure does not violate the `` Goodman Triangle '' -LRB- named after a court case -RRB- . The Goodman Triangle , in short , states that 2 of the 3 parties of a life insurance contract must be the same to avoid certain tax consequences -LRB- same owner and beneficiary with a different insured or same owner and insured with a different beneficiary -RRB- . If you want to place more than one beneficiary on the policy , the owner and insured would have to be the same person to not violate the Goodman Triangle . When the Goodman Triangle is violated , the situation can result in the monies being subject to estate taxes or gift tax consequences . If a policy is owned by a trust such as an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , the insured and beneficiary will be the trust and the insured will be the person who 's life the trust was created for . The trust would illustrate all of the payout structure scenarios when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
In Canada if you have a named beneficiary and not your estate then the proceeds bypass probate and are paid directly to the beneficiary . If you name a beneficiary in the `` protected class '' , spouse , parent , child , grandchild , then the policy is potentially protected from the owner 's creditors during the lifetime of the person whose life is insured . In all provinces except Quebec , the relationship must be between the life insured and the beneficiary . In Quebec , it is between the owner and the beneficiary . If you designate a beneficiary as irrevocable , then the policy also has potential creditor protection . In addition no changes to the policy can be made without the irrevocable beneficiary 's consent . If a corporation is owner and paying the premiums on a policy , the the company should be the beneficiary otherwise it will be considered to be a taxable benefit . Ultimately , who should be named the beneficiary depends on what you want to accomplish . If you have any further question or feel I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community ,
Creditors can not go after the life insurance payout to pay the debts of the deceased insured person , as long as the beneficiary or beneficiaries who are receiving the life insurance proceeds are actual people . Life insurance bypasses probate , so the creditor does not have the opportunity to access the life insurance payout . If the beneficiary is the insured person 's estate , the creditors may be able to go after the life insurance death benefit to pay the debts of the insured . If the beneficiary is the one who has the debts , then the creditors can go after the life insurance payout . This is also true if the beneficiary shared a debt with the deceased .
The beneficiaries of a life insurance policy pay in a certain order . First is the primary beneficiary which can be a person , a few people paid by percentage , or an institution , such as to repay a loan . Second is the contingent beneficiary . The contingent beneficiary is paid if the primary benefit dies before or with the insured . Third is the tertiary beneficiary . This beneficiary receives life insurance proceeds if all of the primary and contingent beneficiaries die before or with the insured . If the later beneficiaries are not named on the policy , then life insurance proceeds roll into the estate and will be subject to probate and estate taxes . This is always as shame as life insurance proceeds are usually not taxed if there is a named beneficiary . Be sure and work with a knowledgeable agent or advisor to be sure your life insurance policy is set up correctly .
If it is the Insured person and Policy Owner who has the claims against them , and they die and leave the life insurance proceeds to a beneficiary , the beneficiary does not have to pay the claims of the Insured unless they co-signed for that debt . If there is no beneficiary and the life insurance money ends up in the estate , creditor claims can be filed during probate . If it is the beneficiary who has the claims against them , it depends on the state of residence as to whether a claim can be filed against the beneficiary 's life insurance proceeds , and/or how much of the death benefit is subject to creditor claims .
To be the beneficiary of a life insurance policy means that you would receive the life insurance proceeds if the insured person passed away . Primary beneficiaries are the person or persons who are `` first in line '' for the death benefit . The policy owner picks the beneficiaries , and if there are more than one , the policy owner determines what percent goes to each person . If there are two primary beneficiaries and one dies before the insured person dies , the other primary beneficiary gets the entire death benefit . Contingent beneficiaries can be named in case none of the primary beneficiaries are longer alive when the insured person passes .
Great question ! Insurance policies have three moving parts . The owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The owner holds the right to changing the beneficiary ; The insured is the person that the policy is taken out on ; and the beneficiary is the person who gets paid when you -LRB- the insured -RRB- pass . Do you know who was listed as the beneficiary ? That 's what you really need to know . My understanding of the 50/50 law in your state as explained by a couple of lawyers , does n't mean all debts or assets are necessarily split 50/50 . I 'd advise strongly that you ask the agent or company who holds the policy who they award the ownership to , and your lawyer . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy and you have a wage garnishment out against you , what can be garnished depends on the rules of the state . Federal law sets limits on what can be garnished , but states can add to those limitations . Consult an attorney if your wages are being garnished and you are set to become the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , or have recently received proceeds of a life insurance policy . If it is the deceased person who was insured by the life insurance policy whose wage were being garnished , or who owed substantial debt , the money received by the beneficiary is usually safe from creditors to whom the deceased owed money . If the insured person left his money to his estate , or there were no living beneficiaries on his policy to receive the death benefit , then creditors have access to money left to the estate . But money left to a person as beneficiary belongs to the beneficiary and is not accessible to creditors for the deceased .
This is a very interesting question because life insurance carriers allow for a lot of flexibility in beneficiary designations . For example , you have the primary beneficiary . This person -LRB- or entity , such as a corporation or trust -RRB- will get the money when the insured dies . What if I unfortunately the primary beneficiary is not alive -LRB- or in business -RRB- when the insured dies ? That is why you can designate a contingent beneficiary . This beneficiary will get the money in those exact circumstances - when the primary beneficiary is not available . What if you wanted to name multiple primary or contingent beneficiaries ? That can be done . Do they have to get equal shares ? No . As a matter of fact , especially when the contingent beneficiary is children , parents often do not apportion the benefit equally . What if you want to set up successor beneficiaries along bloodlines ? Such as your child , but if your child is not available , then your childs child ? This can also be done . Make sure you discuss this with your estate planning attorney . What if you want to make the beneficiaries minors ? Not a good idea . An insurance company will not release money to a minor . You will need to do some estate planning to secure that money .
Debtors who are collecting on a debt left by the insured person who died , can not collect it from the life insurance left to the beneficiary , unless the beneficiary was co-signer on the debt . If the debt was incurred by the beneficiary , then debtors can come after the life insurance that the beneficiary collected upon the death of the Insured .
The Primary Beneficiary of a life insurance policy is the person first designated by the Owner of the policy to receive the death benefit if the Insured person passes . The Primary Beneficiary may be one or more persons , or it may be a trust or other entity . If the Primary Beneficiary is one person , he/she gets 100 % of the death benefit . If more than one beneficiary is noted , the death benefit may be split equally , or the policy may assign different percentages to go to each beneficiary . Most policies list a Contingent Beneficiary -LRB- or more than one , as described above -RRB- as well . If all the Primary Beneficiaries are deceased , the death benefit would go to the Contingent Beneficiaries in the manner noted by the policy . It is important to review life insurance policies regularly to make sure that the beneficiaries noted are up to date and that the death benefit goes to the person or persons intended .
By your question , `` Who should life insurance go to ? '' I assume you mean , `` Who should receive the death benefit payment from your life insurance '' . The simple answer is : the benefit payment from your life insurance should go to the person or person YOU assign it to go to ! That person or persons are called the `` named beneficiary '' -LRB- or beneficiaries -RRB- . Who you choose to name as your beneficiary is entirely up to you .
Life insurance proceeds can be taken by creditors if the proceeds go into the estate of the deceased insured person . This happens if the beneficiary of the policy is named `` the estate '' or if the persons listed as beneficiaries are no longer alive . If the beneficiary is a living person , the creditors for the deceased can not go after the insurance proceeds from the beneficiary . If it is the beneficiary who owes debt , creditors may try to access the life insurance money that the beneficiary was left .
Generally `` contingent '' in Life Insurance would refer to the beneficiary . You always name a beneficiary , who would receive the proceeds of the policy . In addition , you can also -LRB- optionally -RRB- name acontingent beneficiary . A contingent beneficiary is a secondary beneficiary that would receive the proceeds from the policy if the main or primary beneficiary does not survive the insured .
When the primary beneficiary of life insurance dies , the death benefit is split up among the other primary beneficiaries , if there are any others on the policy . If there are no other primary beneficiaries , the money goes to the contingent beneficiaries . If there are no living contingent beneficiaries , the money goes to the estate upon the death of the insured . To avoid the money going to the estate , the owner of the policy can select a new primary beneficiary , or just be sure that there are other beneficiaries that are still alive , to receive the life insurance proceeds someday . It only takes a simple form to designate a new beneficiary .
A contingent in life insurance is a back up beneficiary or a back up policy owner . The policy owner has the option of naming a primary beneficiary -LRB- or beneficiaries -RRB- and may also wish to have contingent beneficiaries . Tertiary beneficiaries are the back up to the back up . While it may seem like overkill to have such layers , bear in mind that many contracts will remain unchanged for decades , despite best efforts for life insurance professionals to engage clients in policy reviews every three years . In that time , policy owners desires may have changed about who they want to receive proceeds , divorces happen , beneficiaries predecease insureds , etc. .
A secondary beneficiary for life insurance is also called a contingent beneficiary . A secondary beneficiary is not the same as being the second primary beneficiary listed . If there is more than one primary beneficiary , the death benefit is split among the primary beneficiaries . A secondary , or contingent , beneficiary only receives the death benefit if all primary beneficiaries are deceased .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To Make A Claim On Someone Else 's Car Insurance ?
This one is really dependent upon the circumstances and where you live . I can only speak to how Michigan will treat it . Since we 're a No-Fault state , if your car is damaged , your insurance will cover the damage to your car -LRB- if you have physical damage coverage -RRB- . If you do n't carry physical damage coverage you can sue for up to $ 1,000 in small claims court . Now , most people in Michigan have coverage for this under their policies and will pay it out without going to court . You simply contact their company , explain the circumstances and submit a police report showing their driver is at fault . They usually pay these very quickly . If it 's not for physical damage to a car , you may be able to do the same thing , but the outcome may be very different . If it 's for property damage or an injury , they may or may not work with you . It 's very possible you may have to sue the other driver to recover any damages . Remember , their insurance company represents their driver , not you . I would advise my clients to get an estimate on any damage to a car and to consult a doctor with any injury . Then , depending on what you find out , make a determination on whether it 's worth pursuing . Any time you sue , there 's a lot of time and energy involved and the outcome is not certain . You need to be able to put a dollar amount on it before you proceed . Get your ducks in a row first , then you 'll be in a much better position .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
If you mean , can you pay for a policy for someone else so that there will be a death benefit when they die , the answer is : usually . Most people who buy term life insurance for someone else do it to protect themselves in some way . E.g. . That other person may owe them money , or the Payer knows he/she will have the task of paying for the funeral if the other person dies . Life insurance companies look carefully if the Payer is also the Owner of a policy in which someone else is the Insured . They are not as concerned if you simply pay for a policy for someone else and allow the Insured to own their own policy .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Yes , if you are driving someone else s car and you are involved in an accident your insurance pays first . If the damages go beyond your insurance limits then the car owners policy would pay . Anyone who has a drivers license needs to have insurance or a Financial Responsibility Bond even if they do not own a car , unless they do not drive at all . If you loan your car to someone make sure they have insurance .
There are two parts of an auto policy that provide for physical damage coverage , one part for you and one part for someone else . The first covers your car and that is the coverage that is found in Collision and Comprehensive elements of your policy . These are subject to your policy deductible . The second element is the liability coverage you have in case you cause an accident and damage someone else 's car or other property . A deductible does not apply in this settlement .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Every driver in your household , unless excluded , should be included on your auto policy . If you routinely loan your car to someone who is not a member of your household , you are not required to put them on the policy . This is particularly troublesome when the owner of the car loans the car to someone else on a long term basis . However , if the car is involved in an accident that information flows back to the owner of the car and the insurance policy .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
In Montana and in many state the answer is no because you have no insurable interest . But you can get what is called a non-owned policy that covers you driving any car for liability only so long as you do not have a car titled in your name . The policy is very reasonable as far as rates go and protect you if you hurt someone in and accident and also protects you if you are hurt in an accident and have un insured motorist and under insured motorist . The reason you can not insure someone else 's auto is the insurance company in the event of a claim would have to issue the payment for the carthat you were driving wasdamaged the check would have to go to the owner of the car .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
Life insurance demonstrates that you love someone else . If your death is going to have an impact on someone you love , then life insurance can help -LRB- perhaps a great deal . -RRB- Sometimes life insurance is required to protect the interest of a lender or a contract holder -LRB- who you might not love . -RRB- In the end , though , most life insurance is purchased because people love each someone else .
Is borrowing against a policy a good idea ? Yes , it can be , it can depend though . Keeping the policy in force is important as it creates some tax advantages on the funds borrowed as you are essentially taking a part of your death benefit early for use elsewhere . Where borrowing against your life insurance is a good idea is in what steps you have to take to do compared to other avenues . Have you ever sat in a bank office cubicle while someone else decides if your need is worthy enough ? How they have to decide if your need fits ? A great thing about borrowing against your value is you simply make a call and the money is wired to your bank account . You are not asked to explain your need , your need is not subjected to review by somebody else . Simply put , what you want to do with those funds is not subject to the approval of somebody else .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
Insurers typically use insurance scores not credit scores , but they are in-bedded with some of the same information . For most insurers this is one way of measuring your responsibility . Responsibility is a key ingredient in knowing if you understand what risks you are taking . Let me give you an example . Suppose you want to hand the keys of a new Ferrari over to a 16 year old . An insurer is going to look at that and say . . wait a minute , does that driver know how to drive such a powerful and expensive car . Will he or she give someone else the keys and let them drive . will he or she be using the car for delivery of Pizzas . All of those things might require a specific answer . Yet insurance scores give an insurer information on how you have acted in variety of situations and credit is part of that shorthand that conveys to an insurer that you are or are not a generally responsible person . The most accurate measure of how you will drive is how often you will drive . So be sure to add that element to your discussion with an agent . He or she may have polices from insurers who give discounts to those who use a vehicle say less than 4.000 mile s a year . Talk to your agent and give him or her enough information to be able to accurately present you and your exposures to many companies .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Happens If Your Auto Insurance Lapses ?
That is a great question ! First off , it becomes illegal for you to drive in most States . The process to reinstate the policy is usually fairly straightforward , you show proof of insurability -LRB- you did n't get into an accident , get DUI 'd , or ticketed in the interim , have a major health issue , etc -RRB- , and pay the back owed amount . If that is an issue , sometimes the insurer will be willing to prorate the back owed amount over the new premium , until it is repaid . Sometimes , it is easier to just get a policy with a new company , but expect to get questioned as to why your policy was allowed to lapse , and pay a higher premium . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
The obvious is that you have no more protection and that can also make it illegal to drive your car or any other for that matter . Most if not all states require that you aintain continuous car insurance as a condition of maintaining the registration on your car . Your lien holder or leasing company also requires that .
Really nothing happens when a life insurance policy lapses . That is to say the policy ends and there is no more insurance . There are a couple things that should happen = you should be notified that the policy is going to lapse and it should be explained how you can prevent that from happening . If the premiums are not paid up to keep the policy in force and it does lapse you should be notified of the provision to reinstate the policy and what steps to take and the time limit within which they must be taken .
Several things can happen if you lapse your homeowners insurance . If you carry a loan on your home your lender can force place insurance at usually a significantly higher rate simply because it is a requirement of your loan that you carry homeowners insurance . Also lapsing your homeowners insurance can make it very difficult to obtain a new policy since many carriers will not take a client who has a lapse .
A lapse in auto insurance means you went without auto insurance for a certain period of time . In many states this is a factor for rating purposes . The lapse is viewed as a time your driving record could not be verified which could potentially cause you to have higher rates . Never let your auto insurance lapse ifpossible There are exceptions such as military service that are taken into consideration .
Life Insurance lapses are caused by not paying the premium . When this happens you no longer have coverage . Before a policy lapses , it falls into a grace period which is an opportunity to catch up on payments . When a policy lapses you may be able to reinstate the policy however this is not guaranteed .
Old life insurance policies with paid up premium live until their insured or owner dies , then they pay out a death benefit to the beneficiary . If an old policy if allowed to lapse for non payment , one of two things happen . A term policy is lapsed and cancelled immediatelybecause as term suggests it was `` rented '' until payment is complete . On a cash value plan such as whole life oruniversal life , the cash value pays the premiums until they are exhausted and it too will lapse and cancel .
That is an excellent question ! One of two things will happen . If the policy was paid up long ago , and has remained in effect , then it acts like any other policy , and when the insured passes , it pays out . Unfortunately , what happens most often is that Parents had a policy on the child , the parent that paid the bills passes , the policy does n't get paid , goes into grace period , and then lapses , and cancels . All those years of payments go up in smoke . Please ensure that your loved ones have a copy , or access to , your finances , sand their payment schedules , so that this does n't happen to you . I have had to have the conversation about unpaid policies far too often , and each time it breaks my heart to see the child realize there is no insurance . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! When you stop making payments on your policy , it will enter into what is called a `` grace period '' , and then will `` lapse '' , or end . With a term policy , that is generally no big deal , you do n't lose anything by letting that happen . Your whole life policy can be a whole different story . With the whole life policy , over time it builds a cash value , one that will be kept by the company , should you allow the policy to lapse and poof up in smoke . The better thing to do in the case of a whole life policy is to either `` surrender '' it -LRB- and get your cash back -RRB- or take it as `` paid up insurance '' , have some coverage , and no more payments . Please feel free to contact me if you need help with this , okay ? Thanks for asking !
When life insurance lapses , the coverage ends . If the insured person would pass away after the policy lapses , there would be no death benefit paid to the beneficiary . There is a 30 day grace period after the premium is due , where you can pay the premium and keep the policy from lapsing . Once it is lapsed , it must be reinstated or you need to apply for a new policy . To avoid your policy from lapsing , be sure to keep your life insurance company apprised of any change in address -LRB- if your statements are mailed to you -RRB- or change of banks -LRB- if your premium is paid by automatic withdrawal -RRB- .
This can be different state by state , but I can advise regarding Connecticut . If you let your car insurance lapse here , a couple of things will occur . First , because the CT Department of Motor Vehicles requires by law that anyone who registers a car here must have and maintain car insurance , such a lapse can cause you serious problems down the line . Here , insurance companies and DMV share information so when a policy lapses , DMV is notified by your insurance company . DMV will send a letter requiring you to provide proof that coverage was maintained and if you can not provide such proof , regardless ofhow long the lapse , you will be fairly heavily fined . Secondly , when you do decide to establish car insurance again , you may find that it will cost you more than it did before the lapse . This is because companies have underwriting requirements that stipulate that one must maintain continuous coverage for at least the previous 6 monthsin order to qualify for standard rating . If that can not be proven , you will end up with a higher risk carrier for at least 6 months and will pay a much higher premium that you have been used to paying .
You can switch auto insurance at any time . With more than 33 years of experience as a car insurance broker , I see this happen every day . Usually , the broker or company can be contacted to terminate coverage . Keep in mind that it 's important not to let the prior policy lapse if you are changing companies . Also , it 's important that a new policy be approved by the underwriter , as well as the broker !
If your life insurance policy lapses , it means that your coverage has ended . In order to reinstate it , you will have to prove that your health has not changed . If that is not possible , you will have to get a new policy with new rates . In my experience , the most common reason for a policy lapsing is people moving and forgetting to tell the life insurance company their new address . This is most common if paying annually , as the post office forwarding period may not catch the notice . To avoid your policy lapsing , be sure to keep your current address and checking account on file at the insurance company . Many companies will allow you to set up a secondary address to which notices can also be sent . If you use online banking , set a warning if your life insurance premium is not paid . Treat your life insurance payment as you would or mortgage or auto loan payment . Especially if you are getting older or have had a change of health since you first purchased your policy , protecting you policy will be worth it .
In most cases yes . Depending on the reason for the lapse and the term of the lapse many carriers will allow the policy to be re-instated . Normally the lapse term can not be more than 30 days . If you have had a lapse in your coverage and want to see about getting the policy re-instated contact your local agent , they are the front and rear line when it comes to your coverage . They can help you get your insurance coverage back on track .
This is a very intelligent question I wish more people would ask ! Universal Life Insurance is considered a `` Permanent '' insurance . Unfortunately what often is n't disclosed is that Universal policies have a continuously increasing ` cost of insurance ' assessed annually . So while the premium may not be increased , what most often happens is that the cost of insurance fees eventually eat up whatever cash value had been accumulated until there is no more cash value . Then unless the premiums are increased to cover the shortage the policy will lapse . So it 's better to think of Universal insurance as a longer version of Term insurance .
Yes , many people lapse their life insurance policies . It comes from failure to pay enough premium to keep it in force . Most people buy term life insurance for a level premium for 20-years or so . At the 21st year they COULD pay more and keep it going but hardly anyone ever would because the premium at that time would be very high . So the policy will usually lapse . Any type of policy can lapse if you do n't pay the premium but term is designed to lapse once you do n't need it anymore .
Life insurance policyholders do n't lapse per se , but life insurance policies do . When a life insurance premium bill is received , there is a stated due date for the premium . The life insurance company then provides an additional 30 days past the due date before the policy lapses . Technically , coverage stops at the end of the 30 day lapse period if no premium is paid . After the lapse period , there is a 30 day reinstatement period , in which there is no coverage , but the missed premiums can be paid to put the policy back in-force . If premiums are not paid during the reinstatement period , the only way to continue coverage is to go back through medical underwriting .
An auto insurance lapse means that under the terms and conditions of the policy , coverage provided by that policy is discontinued . Typically , a policy lapses for non payment of premium . Coverage can be discontinued for other reasons , for example , if an insured decides to cancel the policy or , conversley , if the company decides to non-renew because the risk no longer meets the company 's guidlines as filed with the state Insurance Department . The State of CT , and many others , require that liability coverage be in force as a condition of the registration of a car . Thus , if a car insurance policy lapses , and the state DMV therefore is notified , the result could be a fine or suspention of the car 's registration or both . Likewise , many car insurance companies will not offer coverage for those who have not maintained continuous coverage . In a case such as that , the car ower would end up being offered coverage usually in a non-standard company at a much higher premium .
When a life insurance policy lapses , it means that the policy is no longer in effect . If death occurred while having a lapsed policy , the life insurance policy would not pay out . You also lose the right to convert a Term policy to Permanent after it lapses . For Term life insurance , if you get behind in payments , you have one month to catch up to keep your policy in effect . If the policy does lapse , you may be able to reinstate it by filling out paperwork and catching up the premium . However , your health can not have had any substantial change to get that policy back . If you have had a decline in health , you may need to apply for new coverage .
That is a great question ! The deal is that it really boils down to how well you manage your money , in my opinion . The sales pitch for a flexible premium policy is that you have the ability to be `` flexible '' with your payments - you might pay a little more than the premium , skip a payment entirely , or overpay , as you see fit . If you are the type of person that is very closely watching your expenditures , and keeps a sharp eye on your investments , then this policy type can be potentially helpful in the convenience it offers . But ... If you are like the overwhelming majority of Americans -LRB- 77 % - an unbelievable 77 % !! -RRB- that live paycheck to paycheck , part of the 66 % without adequate -LRB- or any -RRB- savings , or the 35 % with a bill currently in collections , this may not be a good thing . The Bible tells us that while `` All things are permissible , not all things are good . '' That is solid wisdom , in this case . The temptation here is to believe that the `` flexibility '' offered here provides you with more wiggle room in payments . While that is true to some degree , the truth is that there is a bottom line cost that has to be regularly covered or the policy goes under and lapses . Once it does , everything that you 've paid into it goes under also . Sadly , what happens to those who have problems with cash flow and/or money management is that they make payments that cover those costs for a while , but slowly start underpaying or skipping payments , and the result is that the minimum premium payment goes up , it becomes unaffordable , more payments are underpaid or missed , and the policy goes down like the Titanic , taking all your money with it . So it is generally my opinion and recommendation that having a single , set premium payment policy is generally a safer bet . If the payment is budgeted for , and prioritized , there is far less chance of the policy falling behind and lapsing . The offer of flexible payments is definitely tantalizing , but then again , most of the things that are bad for us generally are ... Bottom line ? If you are good with your money and keep an eye on your financial matters , there are times when having that flexibility can be helpful . If you feel that money management may be an area of opportunity for you , perhaps the stability of the fixed premium policy would be a safer choice . I hope that helps , if you have any questions , please do not hesitate to inbox me , okay ? Thank you very much for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A Person With HIV Get Life Insurance ?
A person with HIV can get life insurance by converting a present term policy into a permanent plan . There also may be group conversions available through an employer . Also , there are some guarantee-issue plans that possibly may be able to offer coverage . An experienced broker will find any available plans for you .
Being HIV positive makes it very difficult for people to get life insurance . If over age 40 , there are some guaranteed issue life insurance policies available , but these provide only a limited amount of coverage . Some of our clients have obtained small policies through credit unions , mailers from small guaranteed issue policies , or other random places . Of course , getting life insurance through one 's job is a great option if you can get it . It is very unfortunate that there are not more options . Hopefully this will change in the future .
Unfortunately , people with HIV have a very hard time getting life insurance . Even if they have had no symptoms and have lived for many years being HIV positive , they are put into the same category as those who have the final stage of HIV infection , which is AIDS . If age 40 or over , there are guaranteed issue policies that can be purchased by persons with HIV . Younger people might want to look to credit unions or other sources that offer low face amount policies with no health questions , as a perk for signing up .
Unfortunately , HIV positive people can not get life insurance unless it is a graded , guaranteed issue plan that asks no health questions . These plans usually have a minimum age requirement of at least age 40 and have a maximum face amount often under $ 25,000 . With the new treatments for AIDS , hopefully the life insurance industry will make it easier for HIV positive persons to get life insurance in the future .
I specialize in HIV Life Insurance and most of the people I have spoken to think it is always better to be tested anonymously when you get tested because if you test positive then the chances are it will end up in your MIB file forever . As far as a HIV test for Life Insurance if you know your positive then do n't waste your time on a company you know tests for HIV . It is not a requirement for every company . I actually offer a Group Life Insurance policy through a membership that comes with $ 10,000 in life insurance and you can buy-up to $ 100,000 in $ 10,000 increments . It is very affordable and the only requirement is that you work 30 hours or more a week and live in the USA and not in AK , MT , SD , UT VT , or WA CONTACT me for more info
If you take a policy that requires an exam , the blood test will include testing for HIV . If you apply for a simplified issue policy with health questions , the health questions will usually ask if you are HIV positive or have AIDS . The only type of policy that does not test for HIV , or ask about it , is guaranteed issue life insurance .
Yes , as part of the underwriting process one of the lab tests is for HIV . Depending on the state you are applying in , the acknowledgement of HIV testing may be in the wording just prior to the signature space . In other states , like mine , there also is a separate signed page that points out specifically that one of the lab tests will be for HIV . It also notes that you can place your MD there for receiving test results to go over with you and dozens of specialized clinics to help you .
Testing positive for HIV would very likely result in a decline for life insurance . As the medical advances for HIV and AIDS treatment advance , it could change how life insurance companies underwrite this risk . Understand that anything that affects a person 's expected life expectancy compared to the norm will determine the offer for life insurance .
Unfortunately , the only type of private life insurance that HIV patients can get is guaranteed issue life insurance . Guaranteed Issue policies are not available at every age , so there are some people who are HIV positive who may not be able to obtain a life insurance policy unless under a group plan through their work .
People with HIV can get life insurance although you will fall into a guaranteed issue situation . Insurance companies are all about how long you are expected to live . Unfortunately HIV reduces the mortality . Most insurance companies will not underwrite these people . Companies that offer a guaranteed issue or perhaps a graded benefit will look at giving you some life insurance however the death benefit available is limited .
The only type of life insurance available to people with HIV at this point in time is guaranteed issue life insurance . This type of coverage is graded , only provides small face amounts -LRB- usually under $ 25,000 -RRB- and usually has a minimum age requirement of 45 years . Hopefully this is one of those health conditions that life insurance will look at more leniently in the future as HIV treatments continue to improve .
The test has no baring on Life Insurance . Testing positive for HIV after a Life Insurance policy is in force has no affect on the policy . Once the policy is issued the company can not change it because your heath has changed . Testing positive before applying for coverage will be a decline with most companies but not all . Testing positive during an Insurance exam will be a decline or at best postponed till you are rechecked by your own doctor . Being HIV positive will result in higher premiums and restrictions on the amount of coverage . However , you can get coverage . It is very important that you are completely honest with your agent before any formal application is submitted . An experienced agent will do an underwriting pre qualification with a company prior to submitting the application .
A life insurance application is a form divided into sections . The first section asks your personal information , such as name , date of birth , address , etc. . The next section usually asks about the policy you are applying for - face amount , how you want to pay the premium , etc. . Then the application asks about your risk factors : whether you smoke , participate in dangerous hobbies , your health issues , etc. . If you are applying for a simplified or guaranteed issue policy , the questions about risk will be fewer or nonexistent . There will also be some supplemental forms for medically underwritten policies , such as the HIPAA and HIV forms which give your consent to be tested for HIV and for your medical records to be reviewed by the insurance company . Again , if you are applying for a nonmed policy , there is no need for medical exam . But for larger face amounts or very competitive pricing , this type of testing is usually required .
Unless you are purchasing a No Exam policy , the life insurance company will want to know if you are HIV positive . The oral swab test can test for Hepatitis and HIV in addition to marijuana , cocaine and other drug usage . The test also measures cotinine , a much better predictor of cigarette usage than nicotine , and better able to disprove protestations of secondhand smoke .
Health insurance plans will cover non-experimental treatment for HIV , AIDS , and ARC . If you are currently HIV positive you may find it impossible to purchase individual health insurance . Employer group health insurance plans are required to accept you without regard to pre-existing conditions . If you do not have prior creditable coverage there may be a waiting period for pre-existing .
There are many kinds of life insurance policies , some harder to get than others . At our office , we start with the hardest to get -LRB- least expensive -RRB- and work our way through the choices until we find the best price and policy for which our clients will qualify . In states that offer it , guaranteed issue life insurance is the easiest to get , and most expensive . But it also has age limitations , so not everyone can get it . Not counting guaranteed issue life insurance or simplified issue life insurance -LRB- both good options for those who can not get anything else -RRB- , here are some things that could keep you from getting medically underwritten Life Insurance : 1 . A serious health condition that is not , or can not be , controlled . 2 . AIDS or HIV positive 3 . Drug or alcohol treatment in the last year 4 . Current or recent felony or probation 5 . Cancer , heart attack or stroke within the past year 6 . Having had some tests done to determine if you have a health condition , with the results not yet back . Or a surgery coming up shortly ; most companies will postpone until the surgery is over . 7 . Not having US citizenship , work VISA or Green Card 8 . Suspended drivers license 9 . Cognitive impairment 10 . A child under 20 with a serious health condition , whether controlled or not 11 . Being in a wheelchair and/or needing assistance to do activities of daily living such as dressing or bathing 12 . Being on oxygen or dialysis 13 . Being diagnosed as terminally ill Again , there are options for most situations , even those above , if you get the right type of policy . An agency that understands impaired risk underwriting , and that carries many different types of life insurance , is your best bet for finding a policy when you have a challenging health or risk history .
Yes , a positive result on an HiV test will effect your ability to purchase life insurance . At this time , I am not aware of any carrier that will underwrite anything more than a nomial face amount of coverage at a large price . In my state because of current insurance laws a positive result on an HIV test means a decline .
This is designed to test for tobacco , drugs , and sexually transmitted disease such as HIV . A famous basketball player discovered he had HIV through an insurance exam . By doing blood and urine it helps the company putyou in the proper rate class . If you are clean this can be a benefit and save you money on your premium byhelpingyou qualifying for super-preferred rates .
Surprised no one has answered this question . YES !!! HIV medications are covered under Medicare Part D Plans and MA-PD Medicare Advantage Plans that offer prescription coverage all bundled in one . Check with your plan administrator for specific coverage 's though . Anti-HIV medications will always be covered because they are medically necessary to stay alive .
Being HIV positive makes it very difficult for people to get life insurance . If over age 40 , there are some guaranteed issue life insurance policies available , but these provide only a limited amount of coverage . Some of our clients have obtained small policies through credit unions , mailers from small guaranteed issue policies , or other random places . Of course , getting life insurance through one 's job is a great option if you can get it . It is very unfortunate that there are not more options . Hopefully this will change in the future .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Can I Become A Car Insurance Broker ?
To become a car insurance broker you will need to complete your states pre-licensing requirements and then take the state licensing exam . Once you pass the exam you will have your license issued , pending satisfactory review of your background check . Access to insurance carriers is more restricted when it comes to home and auto insurance vs. some othe lines of insurance , so you are best served to find a career position with a major carrier , or work as an assistant for a well established agent . This will give you the ability to eventually access independent carriers directly .
I am not sure I am qualified to tell you how to become the best life insurance agent , I do n't even know who that would be . But after 22 years in the business , I can tell you the things you need to become a very good life insurance agent . First and foremost become a student of the industry . Never stop educating yourself and products and regulations . I am not talking about CE credits but carrier trainings and brokerage trainings , this is invaluable to your success . Next learn to be a good resource for people , be a giver not a taker . Learn appropriate networking skills about how to help clients and prospects , not just sell them something , be a problem solver . Sell like a teacher not a salesman . Last , actually learn social media and how to effectively use it to grow your practice . Do n't guess , there is nothing worse than an agent or broker selling all over the place . Be helpful and relevant . I wish you the best of luck with your growth . Feel free to contact me anytime .
I find it interesting that no one has answered this question from back in October . Becoming a successful Life Insurance Broker is all about relationships you have with people . I recommend to individuals who want to enter this great professions to have at least 3 months of money in the bank to live on so you have time to build your business . Finding the companies to work with is easy . What you have to work at is working a market you want to get into , and start making connections . You should have a way to get in front of people and stick to it . Whether you are going to walk the street dropping into businesses or using social media you have to have a plan and follow it . I could write a paper on this however I think I nailed this question of how to become successful as a Life Insurance Broker . Find a mentor or contact me .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
Great question , but I am afraid I have to say it depends . Each car on your policy will be rated according to who owns it , uses and how they use it , as well as the specific characteristics of the car itself . If you have only one car on your policy now you will be pleased to learn that most carriers offer a multi-car discount.The theory being you can not be driving both cars at once . Many agents and companies can do `` what if '' scenarios to price your additional car , and even if they do not have that capability , they can help you understand the differences that might exist between different makes and models . I would also suggest you also check the info from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety as they test the car in crash situations to understand how a specific vehicle type will respond .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Coverage follows the car . Example 1 : If you were given a car -LRB- loaned -RRB- and the car has no insurance , you can buy insurance on the car and your insurance will be primary . Another option , someone helped you to buy a car . For example your credit score is n't good enough to finance , so a friend of yours signed under your loan as a primary payor . You can get insurance under your name and even list your friend on the policy as a loss payee . In this case , we always suggest you get a loan gap coverage : the difference between the car 's actual cash value and the amount still owned on it . Example 2 : The car you are loaned has insurance . You can buy a policy under your name , list the car on that policy and in case of the accident , your policy will become a secondary or excess . Once the limits of the primary car insurance are exhausted , your coverage would kick in and hopefully pay for the rest . I specifically used the word hopefully , because each accident is unique and it 's hard to interpret the coverage without the actual claim scenario . And even with a given claim scenario , sometimes there are 2 possible outcomes of a claim .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Car insurance covers the car.If you are going to borrow a car , check to determine whether there is current insurance on the car and that the limits are satisfactory . You will deal with the company insuring the car if you have an accident . If you own a car and have insurance on that car it can become secondary coverage if the coverage on the car you are borrowing is inadequate .
As a big do it yourselfer , the answer is maybe ? It depends on what your situation is and how adept you are on gathering information and making a good decision from all the information out there . I mean I like to work on my cars and trucks . I can do many things myself and feel really good about it . However , I do still use my trusted mechanic for the things I simply am not good enough to do myself and that way I avoid putting my family at risk . As another noted , there are absolutely no price savings in going without an agent . The laws in most states prevent any discounting for doing it yourself . It never ever hurts to become informed about a product . I have taught my son the doctor , how to frame a house , wire a house and have a general understanding about construction . He 's a doctor now , and yes , that is fun to say , he has learned enough about how to build that when he decides to build , he can have a good conversation with a builder and know when to call shenanigans or not . By all means it pays to educate yourself , but understand that an open mind is required to educate yourself .
You can drive a car without insurance on it . It should run just fine . However if you are pulled over by a police officer , or become involved in a car accident you could get into plenty of legal and financial trouble . Driving an uninsured car is against the law . Any vehicle damage , or medical bills caused by the accident may become your sole responsibility . Buy insurance before driving the car .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
How much is for car insurance ? Hmmm . What is this person attempting to ask ? How many people like auto insurance ? No , I think they mean something else . How much does it cost ? Yes , that 's probably it . Rates vary , depending on your age , location , driving record and vehicle . As experienced brokers , we 're always happy to shop for the best rates and show you the lowest prices . LIVE -LRB- 2014/2015 -RRB- Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier US car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites where consumers find the lowest available rates .
This is a pretty big and a bit vague . I will assume you are talking about becoming an agent or broker marketing life insurance . When I have brokers who connect to me from just passing their licensing exams , the only focus is how to begin marketing . Let 's face it , if you have no one to market to , then you are out of business before you start . Many agencies will talk to you about what I refer to as your Project 100 . This is all the people you personally have connections to such as your family -LRB- parents , brothers , sisters , aunts , uncles , grandparents and on and on -RRB- , then your doctor , dentist , neighbors and on and on . These people are good to perhaps get some practicing in but what happens after you talk to all of them ? Many agents end up leaving this profession after they have exhausted your Project 100 because you have not learned how to market to others . What niche are you going to focus on , etc. . Put together a business plan , find a mentor who can help you with objections , marketing ideas , advanced sales which life insurance can be used for and identify your market . Now you are off to a good start . I hope this is what you are looking for with your question .
I have given a lot of thought to this question . As you know , I sell life insurance professionally . It is a very competitive marketplace , and consumers have many options . You can go to independent brokers . You can go to captive agents . You can go to P&C brokers , group benefits consultants , financial planners . You can go to bankers , accountants , stockbrokers , and virtually every other financial professional who cross-sells . You can go on-line . You can go to some companies directly . I have staked my ground as a self-employed , independent , life insurance specialist . I think this model equips me to give not just good service , but outstanding service to my clients . I will tell you why . You can not be a jack of all trades and master of none . Life insurance is not an add - on commodity . It happens to be the most complex and extensively underwritten financial product in the marketplace . In some cases , you can go through more hoops buying life insurance than if you were buying a business . A life insurance broker needs to be a master of the underwriting process . He has to guide people through those hoops to get the most desirable results . Therefore he has to specialize in this product , and this product only . Financial representatives who have become expert in another niche simply can not master a second one . How many master builders out there are also master electricians and master plumbers ? The broker also has to be independent . Its not just a question of having access to multiple companies because different companies will be competitive for different insurance . Its also a question of having access to different distributors . Different general agents will have leverage with different underwriters in different companies . You cant just affiliate with one wholesaler and expect them to get the job done right for everyone of your clients . You need to spread your business around . Treating your sales practice like a business is also key . You are not just a salesman , and you are not just an expert . You are a businessman who can not survive without clients . You do not get paid until they are happy with the policy they bought . You need to have an attitude of keeping the customer satisfied . And that starts with making integrity the core of your business model . Every quote given should be both competitive and reliable . People should know what theyre getting before they sign on the dotted line . They should expect to get approved at the rate quoted . This is a normal expectation every consumer has . Whether you aree buying a toaster , a car , or an entire corporation , the product must be delivered at the agreed-upon price . This means that the life insurance salesman must make a commitment and an investment in every client taken on . He will have to negotiate and advocate on behalf of the client to make sure that all parties involved in the prequalification and underwriting processes perform with integrity . This way you as the consumer will be a happy camper when you do business with that broker . And that is the bottom line .
Being a health insurance broker is a extreamly difficult undertaking . The two markets that you will want to consider are the individual and the group markets . It is far more difficult to learn the group market because of the many IRC and federal regulations that come into play . There is no one path to becoming a knowledgable and trusted broker although I do recomend that anyone atempting to undertake such a career put in many months of intense study . Continuing education courses are great sources for indepth information about different aspects of the health insurance world such as HSA 's , FSA 's , systems of managed care , HDHP 's , self-funding , regulatory considerations , etc. . . Another wonderful resource that I view as manditory reading for anyone interested in brokering any employee benefts would be `` The Handbook of Employee Benefits '' by Jerry S. Rosenbloom , it is as close to a brokers bible as I have found . I would be happy to discuss this in more detail if you like ... Feel free to email me or give me a call sometime , - Christopher Lawrence 609-453-4359 Christopher@Lawrence-Financial-Consulting.com
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
You can easily buy car insurance online and you may save a substantial amount of premium . Rates are usually regulated by the State Department Of Insurance , so an online broker 's rates can not be beat ! As an experienced broker with a top-rated website , we understand how confusing , frustrating and time-consuming it can be to shop for auto insurance online.You will find that claims are handled very efficiently by brokers and Agencies with experience in that field . I base that statement on 32 years of experience . Remember ... when you purchase online , it 's the SAME coverage and benefits you get by going directly to an agent that sells you a policy from that same carrier . The online method is quick and efficient and your paperwork is easy to read and understand . Once again , based on 32 years of experience in the business , I make that statement . By shopping , comparing , and researching all of the major insurers , consumers can pay less for their coverage with reputable companies . There are often many other discounts available that can potentially save hundreds of dollars per year . When you shop with an experienced broker and their website , you save ! Reviewing and comparing benefits helps you find the best policy available in your area . If you prefer working with a local broker , just make certain they are VERY experienced and can shop all of the major carriers for you . Either method will get you competitive pricing .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is TMJ Covered By Obamacare
There is nothing in the Obamacare regulations that require an insurance company to cover TMJ . As has been the case in the past , at this point , very few , if any , insurance providers offer health insurance that provides any coverage at all for TMJ . There may be a handful of policies out there that do not exclude this condition , but I have yet to find one in any of the states I 've ever practiced .
I 've yet to find an insurance policy , on or off exchange , that covers TMJ . In my 10 year career I 've always seen TMJ written into the exclusions and limitations of each plan . Regardless of new guarantee issue policies , TMJ is still considered an excluded condition under most plans in the US .
There is nothing in the Obamacare regulations that require an insurance company to cover TMJ . As has been the case in the past , at this point , very few , if any , insurance providers offer health insurance that provides any coverage at all for TMJ . There may be a handful of policies out there that do not exclude this condition , but I have yet to find one in any of the states I 've ever practiced .
TMJ is a disorder of the transmandibular joint of the jaw . It can cause intense pain . Medicare Part B will cover TMJ care , including surgery , if performed by a medical doctor or Medicare-participating oral surgeon who is not a medical doctor . Dental care is not covered by Medicare , even if for TMJ .
I 've yet to find an insurance policy , on or off exchange , that covers TMJ . In my 10 year career I 've always seen TMJ written into the exclusions and limitations of each plan . Regardless of new guarantee issue policies , TMJ is still considered an excluded condition under most plans in the US .
Currently TMJ is not covered by some policies . You need to check the exclusions in your policy . With implementation of the Affordable Care Act in January this may change . There will be fewer exclusions allowed . If you are currently paying for your own insurance , look for premiums to increase as a result .
Starting in 2014 , all pre-existing conditions , including TMJ , must be covered by health insurance companies . There can be no exclusions , waiting periods or extra fees charged for any type of condition -LRB- other than smoking -RRB- . State Exchanges will become operational by October when the Open Enrollment begins . Each state will have their own Exchange Marketplace and you may be eligible for a federal tax subsidy .
Medicare Part B will pay for TMJ surgery if performed by a Medicare participating doctor , or a Medicare participating oral surgeon who is not a medical doctor . As with all Medicare supplies and services , the surgery must be deemed `` medically necessary '' in order for Medicare to pay for it .
That would depend on which health policy you have , and what kind of jaw surgery you need . Many health insurance policies contain an exclusion that does not provide coverage for TMJ , however , if you need any other type of jaw surgery that is deemed to be medically necessary by your physician , most all health insurance policies would provide coverage .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- a dependent child can be covered on their parent 's health insurance policy until they turn age 26 . After you blow out the candles on your birthday cake when you turn 26 you have 60-days to obtain your own health insurance coverage . If you fail to do so within that 60-day period then you will be unable to enroll in ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance until the next open enrollment period for an effective date of the first of the year . In 2014 the open enrollment period begins on November 15th and the earliest date your coverage could go into effect would be on January 1 , 2015 . If you have missed your 60-day enrollment window then you could possibly take out a Short Term Major Medical policy to cover you until you can enroll in ObamaCare compliant coverage . Please be aware that Short Term Major Medical policies do not cover pre-existing conditions , some can decline you for coverage entirely , and they do not meet the individual mandate requirements of ObamaCare for the purposes of avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty .
If it has not already , it eventually will unless there are further delays or changes to the Affordable Care Act . Granted , those who have plans that were in place before the passage of the law on March 23 , 2010 can technically keep these policies in effect . That assumes your insurance carrier does n't phase out such policies and that you make essentially no changes to the policy . You may recall there was quite a national uproar over this issue late in 2013 that prompted President Obama to kind of have to live up to his `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' promise so we have seen more renewal offers of existing pre-Obamacare policies since then in the individual and small group marketplaces . And this does kind of trap these policyholders . ObanaCare compliant policies are generally significantly more expensive than their pre-Obamacare counterparts . So , you can experience some pretty significant rate increases on your old policy in some cases and still be marginally better off financially than moving to an ObamaCare compliant policy . I am certainly seeing this scenario play out in some cases . For ObamaCare to have any vague chance of working financially they really need to pull as many people as possible into their pool . Continuing to allow the existence of non-compliant policies denies them this revenue stream and probably a healthier population that chooses to maintain such policies . So , regardless of the promises of politicians , consumers need to be vigilant if they have an old style policy that they want to keep . The pressure will continue to build to save you people who do n't know better from your `` trash '' policies as the administration referred to them and to move you into the glorious world of ObamaCare .
Asking this question tells me that you need the help of a health insurance broker familiar with your marketplace . Do a Google search , call the Better Business Bureau , look in the Yellow Pages -LRB- if any one does that anymore -RRB- , ask a friend , but get somebody to do the leg work for you . Or , of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov and look up coverage there . When using HealthCare.Gov the consumer should understand that not all health insurance carriers are available through the government marketplaces and that provider networks and approved prescription lists may be different with the same carrier depending upon whether you are dealing with their products outside or inside of the government marketplaces . One good thing about ObamaCare is that the simple answer to your question is just `` apply with an insurance carrier . '' The bad news about ObamaCare is that they now give you a specific time of year -LRB- the open enrollment -RRB- for you to enroll in coverage and after that time only persons experiencing certain change of life status events can enroll for individual coverage outside the open enrollment period each year . You are asking this question nearly 2 months after the close of the first open enrollment period on March 31st , 2014 . If you could have enrolled during that open enrollment period but for some reason did n't and have n't experienced a change of life status event -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , having a baby , losing employer based coverage -RRB- recently then you technically ca n't enroll in major medical insurance again until January 1 , 2015 . Being uninsured will also technically make you subject to the individual mandate tax penalty when you do your individual income taxes next year . Do n't feel all alone , millions of people went through the first ObamaCare enrollment and still managed to stay uninsured . Some by intention other by inattention . If you can pass a few simple medical questions and coverage for pre-existing conditions is n't a must then I would suggest you look into getting a Short Term Medical policy to tide you over for the rest of the year . Be advised that Short Term Medical insurance is not viewedas meeting the requirements under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual mandate penalty . But , many people are finding that the cost of short term medical insurance is low enough against the prices of the new ObamaCare compliant plans that even taking the tax penalty into account they are dollars ahead with the short term policy . For advise please feel free to contact me .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
Obviously that will depend upon who the next President is . Your question probably assumes a Republican President being elected and the current Republican control of the House and Senate continuing after the 2016 elections . A possible outcome that is a distinct possibility . Now , ask yourself , `` How many Federal laws have I seen totally repealed in my lifetime ? '' I think most people would be hard pressed to name any and this is because it is relatively rare . A new entitlement system that already has several million people involved in it has been created as has a new bureaucracy to administer it . These are hard to end . The next President will inherit these `` facts on the ground '' when they take office regardless of their political persuasion . Even a Republican seen as having a clear electoral mandate to end Obamacare will be faced with the daunting political , social and , unfortunately , racial challenges that would be associated with unwinding such an enormous program . A type of political courage that has not been demonstrated in Washington in quite some time would be required to push through a total repeal . And , then there are the uncomfortable questions that have to be faced . 1 -RRB- Do we truly want to go back to the way things were in health insurance before ObamaCare ? -LRB- for example , should pre-existing condition exclusions be allowed to return ? -RRB- and , 2 -RRB- If not , what would we keep and what would we remove from ObamaCare to `` fix '' it ? This is purely opinion , but , looking at the practical challenges involved and the fact that ObamaCare is already injected into the health insurance/healthcare system now , the path of least resistance will be the `` Fix It '' route . Whether it was a President Paul or Cruz -LRB- Trump might be another case altogether -RRB- I really ca n't see them announcing on TV that everyone 's subsidies were being ended immediately and that they would be seeing their health insurance rates increase by hundreds of dollars per month and `` good luck '' . It might not be political suicide but it would be one heck of a headache . Some sort of transitional approach coupled with new solutions would have to be devised to minimize further disruptions in people 's lives and to the healthcare/health care financing industries . So , as much as we may wish that ObamaCare had never arrived , it has . Being realistic , whether it is fixing it , replacing it or totally undoing it , none of those things will happen immediately and the most likely scenario is one where some aspects of the law are retained and others are jettisoned or modified over time . This means that the months and years ahead are almost guaranteed to be as chaotic and subject to rapid and repeated change as what we have experienced during the previous five years . Answer provided by Marlin McKelvy , Chartered Benefits Consultant and president of Consumer Directed Benefit Solutions insurance agency with over 30 years of employee benefits experience serving the insurance needs of businesses and individuals in Tennessee , Arkansas and Mississippi .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
No , Obamacare does not cover Medigap , or any other Medicare related expenses . In fact , Obamacare actually calls for over $ 700 BILLION in cuts to the Medicare system over its first ten years , a budgetary item that places the benefits available to our country 's senior citizens at tremendous risk . The benefits of Obamacare are only available to those under the age of 65 , which basically equates to this law taking money away from caring for our nation 's seniors to secure coverage for younger individuals , at least those younger Americans that do not make enough income to cover the cost of coverage themselves .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Why Is A Roth IRA Better Than A 401K ?
A Roth IRA isnt better . A Roth IRA is different . Contributions for a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- reduce your current income tax . Contributions to a Roth IRA do not . Distributions from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are fully taxable as ordinary income . Distributions from a Roth IRA are not taxable at all . The limits to how much you can put into a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are quite generous . The limits to contributions to a Roth IRA are restrictive . There are taxes and possible penalties if you withdraw money from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- prior to age 59.5 . You can withdraw from the capital invested from a Roth IRA without tax consequences . There are advantages to both .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
Why roll over a 401k into a Roth IRA ? Well I ca n't honestly think of a good answer to do this . In order to do this transfer , if you qualify for a Roth in the first place , would require you to cash out your 401k and combined with your current income , might place you in a higher tax bracket , as well as the extra 10 % penalty for early redemption , and possible redemption fees from the 401k as well . So you might be looking at a `` loss '' of anywhere from 35-45 % of the value of your 401k just from taxes and early redemption penalties . What you would have to figure is how many years would it take you to get back to even ? That would include this loss and the loss of gain years spent getting back to even . How about if you qualify , owning both ? Use new money for your Roth . Yes , it will be taxed , but it wo n't be taxed , penalized and require years to recover the market loss . Have both .
A Roth 401k is a designated Roth account . A designated Roth account is a feature in new or existing 401k , 403b or 457b plans that permit such plans to accept designated Roth contributions . The combined amount you can contribute to all designated Roth accounts in any one year for an individual under 50 years of age is $ 17,500 for 2014 . If you are age 50 or older by the end of 2014 , you can add an additional $ 5,500 in catch-up contributions . You can also contribute to both a Roth 401k and a Roth IRA in the same year which can increase the total contribution amount by $ 6,500 if you are 50 or older .
That is a great question . Rolling over a traditional tax qualified 401K account to a Roth IRA would generate taxes and penalties so the benefit would certainly not be the tax savings , now would it ? A 401K converion transfer is called a Roth Conversion . There is a conversion option that might work and we call it a `` backdoor Roth IRA '' and it might provide some advantages but will require several steps and tax computations and may not be appropriate for you based on the information provided . Your best answer would be to consult with a local agency to learn more about how this conversion tactics might benefit you in a Roth IRA .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
How is a Roth better than a 401k ? Well it 's not a matter of better , it 's a matter of different . Both a Roth and 401k give you tax deferred savings , they just differ on when taxes are applied . A 401k allows contributions to go in pre-tax and grow tax deferred . When those funds are withdrawn they are income and subject to taxes in what ever bracket you 're in . A Roth does the opposite , you pay taxes on your contribution and it grows tax deferred , then distributions from your Roth are done without any tax implication . So the question of one over the other is do you think taxes will be higher or lower when you begin to withdraw funds ?
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
That is a great question ! If you can afford to contribute to both your Roth IRA and your 401k , then by all means do so ! What a great way to provide for your retirement . You can contribute $ 5500 per year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- to your Roth , and $ 17,500 in your 401k . Ideally , you contribute the max to your 401k , especially if your employer matches , and then fund your Roth , to ensure that you have some tax free income to balance the taxed income from the 401k . What a great question ! Thanks for asking !
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 591/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
end question
start question
annuities
Where Can You Buy Annuities ?
You can buy annuities from life insurance agents who offer them . These agents may be in an agency offering many companies or represent just one company . They may be financial planners . They may have websites . You should call around and ask if they have expertise in annuities , because that is very important in annuity sales , due to the large amounts of money involved and the many product features to choose from .
You can purchase annuities at an online brokerage outlet thatdistributeshundreds of tax deferred annuities andsingle premium annuities to give you a broad based selection to choose from . Make sure that they also sell variable annuities as an option . some brokerage outlets don not sell securites and they may be product you 'll want to consider .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
Buying annuities online usually just involves reviewing annuity prices and products and getting to the point where the actual purchase is made . Variable annuities are much more restrictive ; in this answer I am just addressing Fixed and Indexed Annuities . With non-variable products , the annuities can be compared , discussed and materials shared by phone , email , mail and fax . The most effective way is to have your agent share his/her computer screen with you , with both of you on the phone or webinar so that questions can be asked and answered right then and there . To actually buy the annuity , the agent most likely will arrange to meet you face to face to review the materials in person , collect the premium and obtain signatures in his/her presence . There are a handful of situations where the entire process may be done remotely .
In short , it depends on the size of the annuity -LRB- how much you want to put it in -RRB- . If you want to buy an immediate annuity , you 're paying a sum of money to the insurance company in one payment and you 're done - you start receiving annuity payments immediately . If you want to buy a deferred annuity , you are paying premiums to the carrier throughout a given number of periods - you start receiving annuity payments at a future point in time . The advantage being that the monies put into the annuity grow tax-deferred . What you get out of the annuity will vary a lot as well because each carrier that offers annuities will offer different interest rates so one company may offer a large payout to you than another even though you 're putting in the same amount of money either way . This is where an independent annuity broker comes in handy because they can work with you on a personal level , compare options from multiple carriers to see which will offer you the best payout , and get your annuity set up - plus , brokers do not charge fees for their services so you can only help yourself . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
The single premium immediate annuity is the policy from which every other annuity begins . This policy pays a lifetime steam of income in exchange for a lump sum of money . The first alteration was the deferred annuity where the payments did not start within a year but were deferred until later ; these usually allow you to contribute more to the annuity . Then there is the issue of where the money in the annuity is invested . Some are in company funds , some are in separate accounts and some are hands-on investments where the annuitant directs the investments . There are variations of these basic plans that appeal to some people and meet specific needs .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
You can buy annuities from a life insurance agency that sells them . Annuities are contract between the annuity holder and the life insurance company that carries that annuity . Therefore , you buy them from agents who represent the companies that carry the annuities you wish to buy .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you .
The main risk people face with fixed annuities is the buying power of the payments you receive because they do not have a cost of living adjustment -LRB- COLA -RRB- built in . Annuities offering COLAs are available , but generally require a higher premium to account for the increase in payments . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Are Life Insurance Dividend Options ?
Life insurance dividend options tell the insurance company what you want to do with the dividend that is paid on a participating policy . Options depend on the company , but the most common options are : - Paid-up additions - where divididends are used to purchase paid up additions - Accumulate at interest - dividends are placed into an account at the insurance company and they earn a specificed interest rate set by the company - Reduce premium - dividends are used to pay down the premium or cover the entire premium due if the dividend is large enough to cover the premium - Purchase one year term insurance - the dividend purchases term insurance to increase total death benefit - Cash - the policy holder is simply paid the dividend as a check
Life insurance dividend options tell the insurance company what you want to do with the dividend that is paid on a participating policy . Options depend on the company , but the most common options are : - Paid-up additions - where divididends are used to purchase paid up additions - Accumulate at interest - dividends are placed into an account at the insurance company and they earn a specificed interest rate set by the company - Reduce premium - dividends are used to pay down the premium or cover the entire premium due if the dividend is large enough to cover the premium - Purchase one year term insurance - the dividend purchases term insurance to increase total death benefit - Cash - the policy holder is simply paid the dividend as a check
There are three different types of companies that sell life insurance . Stock companies , which pay profits to stockholder aft expenses , fraternal 's that have a common membership and profits are used to provide extra benefits for the members , and mutual companies that pay excess profits back to the policy holder in the form of dividends . Dividends then are the excess profit a mutual company pays . You will have three options with a company that pays dividends : You can leave them to accumulate interest , but you may have to pay tax on the interest , you can allow them to buy additional paid up insurance , this is the one I usually recommend . This helps increase your death benefit thus allowing for inflation . The third option is using them to reduce premium , thus in some case depending on the dividends paid the dividends will eventually be making your premium payments for you . Dividends are not guaranteed .
By IRS definition Life Insurance Dividends are considered a return of `` unused premium '' and not subject to income tax as they have already been taxed going in as premium . Mutual companies pay dividends to policyholders as they have no stockholders as owners of the company . The permanent policyholders -LRB- not term , not universal life policyholders -RRB- are considered the owners of the company and dividends are applied to their whole life policies . A dividend for a mutual life insurance company is a combination of investment return , positive mortality experience -LRB- fewer deaths than expected -RRB- and operating expense savings and what is held as surplus by the company . Money beyond what the company needs or projects is returned to whole life policyholders in that form of a dividend . The surplus is what protects the company if for some reason they goof . Most mutual companies have been paying dividends consistently for more than a century .
First , the Reduced Paid Up feature of your policy allows you to stop making premium payments and accept a reduced paid up option for whatever the reduced face amount is at the time you utilize the option . For example if your 20 year old $ 20,000 policy has a Reduced Paid Up of $ 12,000 and you utilize the option you would have a paid up policy of $ 12,000 with no further premium payments required . If the amount of the reduced paid up insurance is sufficient for your personal needs , you could use the money you paid for your policy and pay premiums on a policy for your daughter . This is not complicated at all and replacement is not an issue since you are keeping your policy . The Reduced Paid Up option does not allow for any up front cash however other than the money you save on premiums . Some Mutual companies that pay dividends . You could take the dividends in cash and use them to help pay for a policy if you have a policy that pays dividends . You could take a loan on the cash value of your policy but I really do not recommend doing that since the loan will reduce your death benefit or you could cash surrender a couple of policies if you do not need the insurance .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Life insurance policies can be participating or non-participating . Participating policies share in the divisible surplus of the insurance company and receive dividends , non-participating do not . These type of dividends are in essence a refund of premium . One of the dividend options available is paid up additions . Paid up additions are like a fully paid up versions of the policy to which they are attached . The paid up additions , have a cash and death value and also attract dividends . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Any life insurance policy that is participating can pay dividends . The most ubiquitous type of life insurance to pay dividends is whole life insurance , but it is not the only type f life insurance that can be participating -LRB- pays dividends -RRB- . It 's important to note that just because a policy is participating , there is no guarantee that it will pay dividends in any given year . Dividends are paid as a result of surplus -LRB- excess earnings -RRB- with the insurer on the product issued .
A participating whole life insurance policy has the potential to generate an annual dividend . It can also have the potential to generate a terminal dividend at the surrender of the policy . Dividends are not guaranteed . A dividend is the return of unused premium to the policy owner . Because dividends are considered return of unused premiums , they are not taxed up to basis . Dividends can be taken in cash and used in a verity of internal policy rider applications : term insurance paid up additional insurance , to reduce premiums , to pay premiums , etc. .
Paying life insurance dividends can be paid on any type of policy from any participating life insurance carrier . The most common companies that pay dividends are called mutual insurance companies . Some of the more common names of mutual insurance companies are State Farm , NY Life and Northwestern Mutual . Mutual insurance companies consider the policyholders part owners of the company and share a portion of the profits as dividends . You may or may not receive a benefit based on the year 's profits . You may find mutual company premiums a bit more expensive than none mutual companies with an expectation of paying their dividends . When purchasing a life insurance policy you should find the best product at the best price to cover your unique situation , not on who pays a dividend or not .
When you see a dividend payment on your life insurance policy it means your life insurance company is a mutual company . This means as a policyholder you are considered an `` owner '' of the insurance company , kind of like a stockholder in a company . The dividends are profits repaid to the policyholders in a form of reducing your premiums when the company makes excess profits for the year . Depending on the type of policy you have , dividends can have options to be paid in cash , reduce loans or increase policy cash value . Common mutual life insurance companies include New York Life and Northwestern Mutual .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
What are life insurance dividends ? Dividends are a part of working with a mutual life company and by IRS code are considered a return of overpaid premium to the policy holder and are not taxed as income . The dividends are made up of savings from operations overhead , a surplus left from death benefit reserves and the company investment portfolio returns . Dividends are not guaranteed as all three of these main components can be projected , but not `` known '' in advance .
what is a life insurance dividend ? Dividends are paid out to whole life policy holders of mutual companies . Mutual companies are policyholder owned , there are no stockholders . Dividends by IRS explaination are a return of unused premium and not subject to income tax . A dividend is made up of three things , investement returns . savings from operating expenses and savings from unused funds set aside for death claims .
Life insurance dividends are paid on par life insurance plans . Most par plans are some form of permanent life insurance but term policies can pay dividends as well . Dividends result from the insurance carrier `` overcharging '' you so any dividend is considered a return of premium and is normally not subject to taxation .
This is one dividend option that is available on a Whole Life policy . You can talk to your Insurance Professional about what option best meets your needs , but a policy like this credits dividends on an annual basis calculated at the policy 's anniversary date . You can choose to take them as cash , allow them to just accumulate or have them purchase `` paid up additions '' which are in effect little additional amounts of coverage that increase the original death benefit that you chose .
The type of life insurance that pays a dividend is called a participating policy . Dividends are paid when the insurance company makes a profit and , in essence , shares them with its policyholders . The type of life insurance company that offers participating policies that pay dividends is called a mutual company . The type of policy that pays a dividend is usually Whole Life .
Whole life insurance has many advantages to it . The first being that your premiums are fixed and guaranteed for the rest of your life and as a permanent insurance program , it builds cash value over time . If it 's a participating whole life policy , any dividends that are paid out can be used to either increase the death benefit via paid up additions , reduce your premium , or make a payment to you directly -LRB- options depend on which carriers whole life policy you have -RRB- . If you use the dividends to reduce the premium , the policy can become self-sustaining after a number of years - meaning no more premium payments . Non-participating policies only build cash value - these types of plans do not pay out dividends . If you 're buying whole life coverage when you 're young and its cash value builds for years and years , it can create a nice nest egg for funds that can be used during your retirement years . It 's important to remember that if you borrow from an insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the monies are expected to be paid back . If you cash out the policy , you lose the life insurance coverage . An alternative for those who are not very concerned about the cash value and want to maximize the death benefit of your life insurance , you may want to consider a guaranteed universal life policy instead of whole life . GULs can offer a larger amount of coverage than whole life policies for the same premium or save you a ton of money on your premiums for a given level of coverage . Make sure to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can create a structure that will best serve your needs , goals , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If a life insurance policy is truly `` paid up '' it simply means no further premiums are due and it is guaranteed to be that way . Some people use the term `` paid up '' incorrectly to describe premium `` offsets '' using dividend values to pay required premiums . Such arrangements are not paid up and not guaranteed . More on this in the last paragraph . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums and are not paid up until age 95 or 100 . A policy can also be `` paid up '' at a lesser value than the death benefit . Whole life policies feature a `` reduced paid up '' non forfeiture provision . In the event the policy owner wishes to stop paying annual required premiums , the policy owner can ask the insurer to reduce the death benefit amount for the policy so that no further premiums would need to be paid . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' . In a low interest environment like we have now , dividends are being reduced from what was illustrated . Many clients who expected to stop paying premiums and instead pay them via the dividend values in their policy can not do so yet since the dividend values are not sufficient to offset premiums .
In Canada , life insurance dividends are not taxed as paid up additions while they are attached to the policy . If they are dividends on deposit the interest on the dividends is taxable . On surrender or withdrawal the dividends form part of the cash value and will be taxed on the gain . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Should I Choose Medigap Or Medicare Advantage ?
It depends on your needs , budget , and preferences . I would recommend consulting with an independent Medigap broker who can work with you on a personal level and help you evaluate your options . If you want to create a predictable healthcare expense structure where you do n't have to worry about receiving massive medical bills , you may want to consider buying a Medigap plan -LRB- most likely a Medigap Plan F or Plan G -RRB- . The premiums for Medigap plans are typically a little higher than a Medicare Advantage plan , but they feature much broader coverage . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable and are standardized -LRB- meaning a given Medigap plan features the same benefits regardless of the carrier you have it through - a plan F from company ABC is the same plan F from company XYZ -RRB- . They also have no networks , meaning you can go to any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- the vast majority do these days and you can check to see if a doctor in your area does using a physician finder tool on Medicare 's website , Medicare.gov -RRB- . As far as services go , if your doctor accepts Medicare , then they have to accept your Medigap plan as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
Medigap works along side your original Medicare helping to pay Medicare covered expenses that are not paid for by Medicare due to deductibles and coinsurance . You will pay a premium for a Medigap plan but your out of pocket exposure in the event of a large claim will be less than with a Medicare Advantage plan Medicare Advantage takes the place of Medicare . While you are still in the Medicare system and protections , responsibility for benefits and claim management are provided by the insurance company , not Medicare . You can not have both a Medigap and a Medicare Advantage Plan since Medicare Advantage has different deductibles and copay 's than Medicare . Premiums are much less than Medigap plans but you will have more out of pocket exposure in most cases .
It can be a bit confusing , but Medigap plans are utilized for persons that are covered under traditional Medicare . You can buy a policy from an insurance company such as Blue Cross , Humana or UnitedHealthcare -LRB- although there are plenty of other insurers to choose from -RRB- . It is designed to provide coverage for many of the out-of-pocket costs -LRB- such as Part A deductible and Part B costs -RRB- that are not picked up by Medicare . The different Medigap plans are standardized which makes it easy to compare , although there are differences in benefits . Medicare Advantage is a private health plan that is offered as an alternative to the more-traditional Medicare coverage . Often an HMO or PPO , you may see additional benefits included . Many of these plans include some form of prescription/drug benefit . Of course , you can not purchase BOTH a Medigap and Medicare Advantage plan . You can choose one , or simply not use a supplemental policy . An independent broker and/or a reputable website is a great place to view options from multiple companies . You can often instantly compare plans and easily apply online .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Medigap Insurance , also called `` Medicare Supplement '' Insurance works with original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- to provide coverage for the `` gaps '' - the coinsurance and deductibles required to be paid by the Medicare beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- under original Medicare . Although Medicare represents excellent insurance coverage , these `` gaps '' can be expensive for the consumer . For example , the Part A -LRB- hospitalization -RRB- deductible for 2015 is $ 1,260 , and the Part B -LRB- doctors costs , etc. -RRB- is $ 147 plus 20 % coinsurance . A Medigap policy insures these potentially large `` gaps '' with the payment of a known monthly premium . Medigap Insurance is optional for the consumer - there is no `` requirement '' to purchase it , although it is a good idea to get some Medigap coverage if staying with original Medicare . Alternatively , Medicare beneficiaries may select a Medicare Advantage Plan . Although there are costs and limitations in Medicare Advantage Plans , a beneficiary does not need , nor can they purchase Medigap Insurance under a Medicare Advantage Plan .
Depends when you retire really because being in retirement has nothing to do with the prices . You 'd likely be looking at an individual health plan if you 're under age 65 so it will depend on your age , zip code , what health plan benefits you want , etc. . The premiums can be a as little as a couple hundred dollars per month or well over 500 per month . If you 're over 65 , you 're likely looking at Medicare coverage if you do n't qualify for any retiree programs from an employer . On Medicare , you 're looking at a couple of different options . If you want more comprehensive type coverage , you would want to buy a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- and pair it with a Part D prescription drug plan -LRB- if you want drug coverage -RRB- . If you want a Medicare type program that works similar to under age 65 individual health insurance works , then you may want to consider a Medicare Advantage plan . Medigap plans are standardized and do n't have annual enrollment periods to follow - Part D plans and Medicare Advantage plans do . The premiums for a Medigap plan depends on which one you want to get -LRB- there are 11 to choose from -RRB- , your age , zip code , and if you smoke or not . Medicare Advantage and Part D plans that are available depend on your zip code . You should consult with an independent insurance agent or broker who can discuss your specific insurance needs and preferences to determine which is the most suitable coverage for you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
You do n't `` need '' Medicare Part C , but you may choose to have it as your Medicare coverage . Medicare Part C is really known as the Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO . Part C combines your Original Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- medical -RRB- , and usually Part D -LRB- drugs -RRB- . It 's important to note that if you have Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- , you do n't need a Medigap Policy and ca n't be sold one to help supplement your health care . You can only purchase a Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- , if you are still on Original Medicare Part A and Part B . There are a lot of moving parts to Medicare . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage plans are a prime target of the Obama administration . Congress is looking for ways to reduce their contribution to private insurance carriers to fund Advantage plans . Medicare Advantage plans can not be offered in every area . Medicare sets forth specific guidelines for Advantage plans including the number of hospitals and participating doctors they must include in their network . Over the next few years you can expect to see fewer Advantage options , fewer participating providers , higher premiums , higher copay 's . They are not going away , but you may find fewer reasons to choose an Advantage plan over a Medigap plan .
Medigap and Part C are not the same . Medigap is supplemental coverage to your Original Medicare Part A and B . You do n't have to buy a Medigap Plan , it is optional . Many people , however , use the Medigap Policy to help cover the 20 % of Medicare approved costs not covered by Part A and B. Medicare Supplement insurance is private insurance in which you pay a premium every month . You are allowed to visit any provider who accepts Medicare . Part C is called a Medicare Advantage Plan . It acts like an HMO or PPO , so you are restricted to using network doctors . This type of Plan combines Part A , Part B , and usually Part D -LRB- drug coverage -RRB- . It 's important to note , if you join a Medicare Advantage Plan , you do n't need and ca n't be sold a Medigap Policy . In other words , you ca n't buy a Medigap Policy to supplement your Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Yes , you can switch from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . To do so , you must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage plan . Then you must enroll in original Medicare . If anyone asks you to buy a Medigap policy without being enrolled in original Medicare , you should report them . If you have never used Medigap before and you had Medicare Advantage for under a year , you can have your choice of Medigap policies .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Which Credit Cards Provide Rental Car Insurance ?
In my experience , most of the major cards provide some coverage when the card is used to secure a rental car . Obviously , you should call the customer service number for your card to confirm exactly what benefits are provided . The coverage is usually for physical damage of the car and provides protection up to $ 500.00 . This works nicely in most cases because assuming you have your own personal car insurance , on average it is very likely that you are carying a $ 500.00 deductible for both Comprehensive and Collision on that policy .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
My previous career was for a rental company so I have a great deal of knowledge in this area . When determining purchasing insurance when renting a car it is important to consider these main factors . 1 -RRB- Quality of your own insurance policy If you have state minimum coverage dont except much help from your insurance company if something were to happen . 2 -RRB- Purpose of Rental - Yes , The reason why you are renting the car plays a big factor . Some insurance policies will only cover rental vehicles if it is a replacement rental . So if you are renting for a family vacation there is a possibility that you arent covered . Always check with your insurance company . 3 -RRB- Type of Vehicle Another huge factor , a lot of policies wont cover any vehicles that are built on a pick up truck frame . Most consumers are unaware that some minivans and SUVs are in fact built upon a pickup truck frames . The best way to protect yourself against this is to always rent a vehicle that similar to the car on your policy -LRB- If you have a SUV on your policy , you should be safe to drive a SUV -RRB- 4 -RRB- Does your credit card cover it ? A little known benefit -LRB- that most credit cards have -RRB- is rental coverage ! Some will require you to activate it before renting a vehicle while others will give it you automatically . I would always check with your credit card provider to see which type of coverage you have . They often pay for loss-of-use as well which is an extra bonus that most insurance policies wont cover . 5 -RRB- The Length of the rental - The longer the rental the more expensive the rental insurance becomes . At some point the amount of money you are paying for the extra insurance isnt going to be worth it . That breaking point is up to you to decide . 6 -RRB- If something were to happen right now , what can you afford ? I think this is the most important . The most common rental is a 3 day weekend rental . The typical insurance cost for that that length of time can be $ 60 to $ 200 . However , the cost of damage , loss of use , and deductibles can add up to be $ 2,000 and get as high as the total loss value of the vehicle . If you were to total out a vehicle would your insurance cover it ? Or could you afford a $ 20,000 vehicle that you wont drive ? 7 -RRB- Remember it is not your vehicle ! Very often damage happens to our own vehicle and we dont even notice or care because we consider the damage to be minimal . However this is not the case when renting a vehicle . You do not have control over what damages are fixed and which ones arent . So Keep in mind that a ding to you , could be consider major damage to them . At the end of the day , you have to be honest with yourself and determine if purchasing the extra insurance is worth it or not . Not every situation is a same and multiple factors needs to be taken into account .
This depends upon where you are coming from . If you currently live in the U.S. you will have a couple of options . There are endorsements available through your current Home and Auto policies for rented/non-owned cars . If you have a credit card , then the credit card might offer car rental insurance if it is used to purchase the rental . If you do n't have Home/Auto insurance in the U.S. or a credit card then you can always purchase rental insurance through the rental agency . I hope these options help .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
That is a great question ! By law , you have to be insured to drive a car . Now when it comes to rental cars , do you have to already have a policy ? Not necessarily - you may purchase a temporary policy from the rental agency ; check with your credit card company , many offer rental cars and insurance to drive them at a discount ; and sometimes your frequent flier cards are tied to rental car companies and deals also . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
Always check with your insurance professional before renting a car . Generally speaking , unless you have special limits found in a non standard policy , the coverage you have on your personal auto policy does extend over to rental cars while they temporarily replace yours . Keep in mind , though that if you have an older car , for example , and are not carrying Collision on your policy , you will not have collision on the rental . The Liability coverage you have transfers fully , but comp and collision only transfer if you have them . Remember though that I referred to a rental car . This extension of coverage does not necessarily include rental vans or trucks used for moving or hauling.One other thing to keep in mind . Many credit card ccontracts provide some limited coverage if used when renting a car.This is usually up to $ 500.00 which may be enough to cover the deductible from your personal auto policy .
As a rule of thumb I always recommend you have as much coverage on a rental car as you would the cars you own . Typically , this is not an issue because most agents will automatically put you down for `` non-owned/hired '' autos on your personal policy . This is just an endorsement to your policy that will extend your liability and collision coverage to cars you are legally borrowing or renting . Make sure you check your policy for an endorsement like this . Other options : you can get rental insurance through the car rental agency or your credit card sometimes offers coverage for rental cars , just call the company and ask .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
It is possible that your auto policy will extend coverage onto a rental car while it temporarily replaces yours . Remember though that if you have an older car and are just carying liability , that will be the only coverage that transfers . You could therefore be financially exposed without also having Comprehensive and Collision -LRB- Physical Damage -RRB- coverage . Check with your insurance professional . Also , check the terms and conditions of your credit card . Many cards provide some limited coverage for a rental , usually up to $ 500.00 , which in many cases is enough to cover your own auto policy deductible .
Rental car companies offer a physical damage option as an amendment to their standard contract . This option , offered for an additional daily charge , provides for covreage in the event that their car is damaged while in your posession and control . But before you sign on the dotted line for this , check with your insurance professional to see if your personal auto policy extends coverage on to rental cars . If it does , then save yourself the money on the rental agreement and do n't accept the option . Also , check with your bank card provider . Many include coverage on rental cars usually up to $ 500.00 .
Coverage can vary by State . In Texas , a standard private passenger auto insurance policy will cover you in a rental car as a tempory substitute - and damage to the rental unit actually comes under the Property Damage coverage for contractual liability . Although it IS covered , I STILL buy the physical damage waiver coverage offered by the rental companies . I do n't want the rental company filling a claim on the vehicle for something I was NOT responsible nor tagging my credit card for a LARGE amount and using up my credit limit . Hope this helps !
Most rental companies would be happy to provide auto insurance to cover their rental car . Another approach is to purchase a non-owned auto policy . That would cover your liability concerns . If you are really gutsy you might check with your credit card company and see if they provide coverage for physical damage if you use their card . This system works but it is certainly not for the feint of heart .
That 's a great question ! If you have auto insurance of your own , and your coverage is enough , you are fine using it . Check with your agent to be certain . If you do n't , the rental car company will have policies you can purchase . You may already have coverage as a perk from your credit card company , many companies will throw in rental car discounts and insurance when you use their card . Call them and see ! Thanks for asking !
Here is a life hack : 1 . Check with your credit card provider . Many of them offer liability coverage automatically included as long as you pay for the rental with this card . 2 . If you have business insurance , but no business auto , add Hired/Non-Owned coverage . For pennies a day -LRB- $ 100 - $ 200 a year -RRB- it will provide you with auto liability insurance for cars you rent or borrow for your business needs . It also covers your employees ' and your personal auto that was used in a course of business . For example , you are asking your employee to drop off office keys . The employee gets into the accident . You have liability coverage provided . 3 . Some insurance carrier also offer hired car property damage . This is the coverage for the car you rented/hired/borrowed .
Some insurance companies will not accept credit cards for payment of premiums . Some will . Typically if you pay your premiums annually , semi-annually or quarterly many providers will accept credit card payment . It seems the biggest issue with credit cards is that people tend to forget about updating their information as needed with the companies they pay by credit card . When a card expires and is replaced with a new expiration date , the previous card is no longer useable . Sometimes people will delete a credit card account that was being used for automatic payments and not inform their creditor of a replacement card . It creates a lot of accounting headaches . So insurance companies prefer to debit from checking or savings accounts .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Veterans Group Life Insurance ?
Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is five year renewable Term life insurance for persons who have served in the uniformed services . to convert SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI , you must do so within 120 days of your separation from the service . If you wait longer than the 120 days , you have one additional year , but then you must show evidence of good health to be approved .
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
In order to get VA Life insurance , someone must meet one these conditions : 1 -RRB- Have converted their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days after separating from the Service . This can be extended one year with a statement of good health . 2 -RRB- Have been given a VA rating for a new service related disability incurred in the past two years . This qualifies them for S-DVI -LRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Qualified for VMLI -LRB- Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance -RRB- by virtue of being a disabled veteran who was able to get an SAH grant .
When servicemembers separate from the service , they have the opportunity to convert their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be done within a short time . If a veteran is looking for life insurance after some years of being out of the service , there is not a VA policy especially for them , but they can get private life insurance as can anyone of that age group .
There is life insurance for veterans provided by the VA called VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be purchased shortly after separation from the service . If getting a private policy , a veteran can get any life insurance policy that anyone else can get , as long and age and health guidelines are met .
Unless a service person gets Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- within a year from separating from the service , their Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- will end and they will need to get a private policy . Contact an agency or website that carries several products to choose from to find the best rate for Veteran 's life insurance .
To apply for Veterans Life Insurance , you can go to the benefits.va.gov website . However , keep in mind that you must apply for VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- shortly after departing from the service . You are only qualified for VGLI by converting SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to it within a certain time frame .
Unfortunately , Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is a lifetime renewable Term policy without cash value . Therefore , you would not be able to borrow from Veterans Group Life Insurance because it does not have any cash value or pay any dividends .
If you have a health condition that makes it difficult to get life insurance elsewhere , you have recently separated from the service , and are eligible to get Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- without having to answer medical questions , I think VGLI is a very good deal . If you are very healthy and able to get similar rates elsewhere , I would advise to lock in your premium for a longer period of time than Veterans Group Life Insurance locks them in . However , since the rate reduction in 2008 , VGLI premiums are good and it may be hard to beat them . You might want to purchase a permanent policy elsewhere along with taking VGLI Term to cover all your life insurance bases .
Im not sure if there is any free coverage . If there is it is a small amount . But all members of the military are eligible for subsidized coverage through the Department of Veterans Affairs . The program is called SGLI -LRB- Service-members Group Life Insurance -RRB- . It is super cheap and all members of the military should take advantage of it . It is a flat rate regardless of age/tobacco use/health . $ 400k costs $ 27/m When you retire you can convert it to the veterans group life plan . WEBSITELINK
The requirements for receiving VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance recently changed -RRB- . For those retiring from the service before Nov 1 , 2012 , you must apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . At this point in time , you will need to answer some health questions to be eligible to get the policy . You also need to have been on SGLI while you served , in order to qualify for VGLI . If you retired after Nov 1 , 2012 . you have 240 days to apply for VGLI without answering health questions . If you miss that deadline , you can get VGLI with evidence of good health if you apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . Again , you must be on SGLI at the time you left the service , in order to qualify for VGLI . Others who can get VGLI are the Individual Ready Reserve or Inactive National Guard . If you do not fit any of these categories , or do not wish to go that route , veterans can get an individual policy from private companies . Some of the health conditions that , unfortunately , can hit veterans disproportionately high are hepatitis , PTSD , diabetes , and others . Going to a company that specializes in any health conditions you might have will be a big help .
A veteran needs Long Term Care Insurance if he/she does not want to utilize long term health care provided by the Veterans Administration . This may be due to location or some other bias the veteran has about receiving VA medical care . Or a veteran might want Long Term Care Insurance in case he/she can not qualify for full benefits or full compensation for care offered by the VA. .
The military offers their own group life insurance policy called SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- . Servicemembers are automatically issued $ 400,000 of life insurance at a very reasonable cost , but they can choose to take a lower amount , or decline it altogether . Upon leaving the service , they can convert it to VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- if they do so within a certain time frame .
The VA does offer life insurance for Veterans , but there are narrow guidelines as to who can get it . If you are currently retiring from active service , you must apply to change your SGLI to VGLI within 120 days -LRB- you can wait one year longer with evidence of good health -RRB- . You can also get Veterans Group Life Insurance if you are a member of the Individual Ready Reserve or Inactive National Guard , or were disabled as a result of such service .
A veteran who is no longer in active service can purchase the same life insurance as anyone else , based on age and health requirements . There is also military life insurance for veterans , but it has strict conditions -LRB- you can see those by searching on the word `` veteran '' on this website -RRB- .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
Unfortunately , veterans do not get any life insurance unless they have met certain conditions . These are the major ones : 1 -RRB- Before Nov , 2012 - You must have been receiving SGLI and applied for VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days of separating from the service , or you have a year and 120 days to apply if you can show good health . 2 -RRB- After Nov , 2012 - Same as above but substitute 240 days for 120 days 3 -RRB- You are a member of the Individual Ready Reserve Unit or Inactive National Guard . If you are eligible for VGLI you can get up to $ 400,000 or the amount that you had in SGLI , whichever is lower .
Servicemans Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- is a federal program . It replaced a program instituted during World War II that proved to be one of the best benefits servicemen could have . SGLI is available to all service personnel but ceases when they leave active duty . Veterans group Life insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is a similar , however , more costly program for servicemen who have left active duty .
VGLI stand for Veterans Group Life Insurance and is life insurance for persons who have served in the uniformed services . It is Term life insurance that can go up in price at regular intervals . Neither SGLI or VGLI is available in Whole Life and can not be converted to Whole Life . To get permanent coverage you would want to purchase a private policy .
The VA does not offer Disability Insurance . However , the Veterans Administration does pay monetary benefits to veterans who have disabilities that were caused or aggravated during active military service . The disability is rated on a scale of 1 to 10 and the compensation is adjusted according to the degree of disability .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What renters insurance covers the entire U.S. no matter where you are living ?
Renters Insurance is available for tenants in all States . Renters Insurance Policies cover personal property , additional living expenses , personal liability and medical payments to others . Renters Insurance can be purchased by tenants renting houses , apartment units , condos and townhomes . Renters Insurance is transferrable from one rental unit to another when the insured moves ; however , it is not transferrable across State lines since policies need to be rewritten according to State Department of Insurance regulations which are different in each State . Stillwater Insurance Group offers the most affordable options for renters ; there is also an online self service renters insurance platform available directly for clients ' use : WEBSITELINK Using the above link , you may obtain a free quote and purchase your insurance contract directly online . For further questions regarding any details , you may contact a licensed representative at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 .
Because the regulation of insurance is a state responsibility a different policy must be selected any time you move to a different state . Many companies operate in most or all of the states so this doesnt have to be a big problem just call your insurance company to determine if they can cover you in your new place and they will arrange for an agent to contact you .
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
This depends upon where you are coming from . If you currently live in the U.S. you will have a couple of options . There are endorsements available through your current Home and Auto policies for rented/non-owned cars . If you have a credit card , then the credit card might offer car rental insurance if it is used to purchase the rental . If you do n't have Home/Auto insurance in the U.S. or a credit card then you can always purchase rental insurance through the rental agency . I hope these options help .
Yes . To be eligible for Medicare when you have a green card , but are not yet a U.S. citizen , you must have lived in the U.S. for at least 5 continuous years and you 've met your 40 quarters of working life in the U.S. and paying FICA taxes . If you do n't meet the work requirement , you may be able to get Part A , but likely have to pay the Part A premium . If each condition is met , you should be eligible for premium-free Part A.
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
There appears to be a wave of reconsideration of marijuana laws across the U.S. . In most cases this is in the area of medical marijuana , but many states are also taking a fresh look at recreational marijuana laws . If you truly are only a recreational user with no other factors you should have no problem getting life insurance . If you have any treatment for addiction -LRB- alcohol or drugs -RRB- , a DUI or other drug / alcohol legal problem you will have less options . Marijuana is a topic that the industry is watching closely . It is likely that underwriting guidelines will evolve in coming years , so no matter what rate you get today it would be wise to keep in touch with your agent . There is a chance that over the next few years marijuana usage will have less of an impact on your life insurance premium .
In the era of ObamaCare , all you need to get health insurance is the ability to fog a mirror and make your monthly premium payments . You also need to be a U.S citizen or legal resident . Underwriting with medical questions is no longer allowed so it 's really a matter of selecting a health insurance plan that you want and completing and submitting your enrollment form . Please remember that the ability to purchase individual health insurance is now restricted to either ; A -RRB- the annual open enrollment period which in 2014 begins on November 15th for an earliest effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 or B -RRB- you experience a change of life status event such as getting married , divorced , having a child , losing other health insurance coverage and -LRB- this year -RRB- the renewal of your employer 's group health plan can provide an opportunity to purchase individual health insurance coverage .
You want to find the structure that is going to be the most suitable to meet the needs you want to have covered . There 's a number of factors that you should think about when buying life insurance including : 1 -RRB- Why do you need the coverage ? 2 -RRB- How long do you need it ? 3 -RRB- What risk class do you qualify for ? -LRB- this is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Does the policy provide full coverage -LRB- payout whether death occurs by illness or injury - if you die by illness and you only have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What is the company 's financial rating ? - this is a big point when you 're looking at permanent coverage . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , send me a message - my contact information is provided on my profile . I do not charge fees for my input and can walk you through the entire process of securing a policy .
For most people , Medicare begins at age 65 . If you are a U.S. citizen or legal resident and have lived in the U.S. for the last 5 years you are entitled to Medicare when you turn 65 . You may also qualify for Medicare if you have been disabled -LRB- Social Security guidelines -RRB- for 2 years .
If you are lucky enough to work for an employer who pays 100 % of the employee rate for the group health insurance they offer -LRB- pretty rare these days -RRB- then standard group contracts require all eligible employees to be enrolled . So , in that circumstance you might get health insurance coverage whether you want it or not . If you have to contribute towards the cost of the health insurance provided by your employer then you have the right to waive participating in your employer 's group health plan . I will presume , though , that your question is really about the `` Individual Mandate '' provision of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and its requirement starting on January 1 , 2014 that a person have health insurance coverage that meets the minimum essential benefit requirements under the law or be subject to the `` Shared Responsibility Payment '' -LRB- does n't that sound better than tax penalty ? -RRB- on your income taxes . ObamaCare does give you the choice of either getting health insurance coverage or going without coverage and potentially being subject to a tax penalty . In that sense you can opt out of having health insurance coverage . But wait there 's more ! The Affordable Care Act provides for persons in certain situations or who are members of certain groups to be exempt from the individual mandate requirement . Some examples are ; 1 -RRB- If the cost of coverage for you is more than 8 % of your annual household income 2 -RRB- If your annual income is below the threshold where you have to file personal income taxes 3 -RRB- If you qualify for a `` hardship '' exemption -LRB- this can be an escape route for many people -RRB- 4 -RRB- If you have had a gap in being covered of less than 3 months during the tax year 5 -RRB- Members of religious groups that object to coverage on religious grounds 6 -RRB- Members of non-profit religious organizations where members share costs 7 -RRB- Prison inmates 8 -RRB- Non U.S. citizens 9 -RRB- Native American tribe members 10 -RRB- Year long residents of U.S. territories such as Puerto Rico and Guam What could be more simple ? I hope this helps answer your question .
According to Limra in 2011 , 7 in 10 of U.S. households own some type of life insurance . Nearly half of U.S. households own individual life insurance policies . Fifty-eight million or half of U.S. households say that they need more life insurance . Most individual life insurance policies in force are permanent -LRB- 71 % -RRB- rather than term -LRB- 29 % -RRB- . Life insurance is one of the most important purchases you will ever make and it is less expensive than most people think . We are here to help guide you in the most efficient and cost effective way possible to protect your family .
Well , you nearly had me stumped on this one . It kind of sounded like health insurance for families who live by the ocean -LRB- I know bad joke -RRB- . But , after a little research it appears that Family Floater Health Insurance is a form of health insurance coverage offered in India . As such it really has no relevance to the health insurance needs of U.S. citizens or legal U.S. residents .
This stats are taken from LIMRA : Thirty percent of U.S. households have no life insurance at all ; only 44 percent have individual life insurance . Fifty percent of U.S. households -LRB- 58 million -RRB- say they need more life insurance . The average amount of coverage for U.S. adults has declined to -LRB- 167,000 -RRB- , down $ 30,000 from the average coverage in 2004 . While 4 in 10 households with children under 18 now include a mother who is either the sole or primary earner for her family yet , among women who have life insurance , their coverage is only 69 percent of the average coverage on men .
According to a recent study , 41 % of U.S. adults have no life insurance at all . Of those who do , many only have group term life through their employer -LRB- will terminate when they leave their employer -RRB- typically at amounts like 50,000 or one times salary . The average U.S. household with life insurance owns enough to replace only 3.5 years of income -LRB- LIMRA 2010 U.S. Life Ownership Study -RRB- even though insurance companies will insure those in the 30s or 40 's up to 25 times their income or more .
Medicare isa national social program administered by the U.S. government thatguaranteeshealth care coverageto allAmericans who have worked in the U.S. long enough to earn coverage . Medicare will generally cover80 % ofyour medical cost . Humana offers enhancements to the government 's coverage either with a Medigap plan which can cover the additional 20 % that Medicare does n't pay or a Medicare Advantage plan that covers all that Medicare covers with added benefits .
That is a great question ! I am assuming that you have moved to your overseas home relatively recently , and had spent time up until then living and working in the U.S. ? I also assume that when you enrolled in Medicare that you opted for a plan that charges you monthly ? -LRB- Because if you are n't being billed , I think I would just let it be , honestly -RRB- And if you are receiving SSI payments , are they worth keeping ? If you are paying for Medicare and not using it , I can certainly understand why you would want to cancel it . Anyway , as frustrating as it can be , it seems as if your only recourse is to do one of two things - give legal authority to someone here in the U.S. to handle your legal affairs and cancel it for you ; or continue to spend the money on the 1-800-633-4227 -LRB- 1-800 Medicare -RRB- phone system . I feel your pain , even the website is frustratingly slow and difficult to manuever . I hope that you can get it sorted out . Thank you for asking !
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Long term care insurance can pay for A LOT , including the following : home health care , assisted living facility care , nursing home care , adult day care , personal care -LRB- Activities of daily living assistance -RRB- , homemaker services , hospice services , respite care , etc. . The need for long term care can occur due to aging , disease or even an accident . According to the 2014 U.S. government Medicare handbook , 70 % of Americans who reach age 65 will need long term care and support at some point in their lives .
I never call Whole Life an Investment , because it has an entirely different purpose , but it is a TOOL ! A financial tool that pays off in many ways . For a kid , it is probably the very best financial tool you can ever have . It guarantees that for the life of that child , they will always have life insurance , so long as premiums are paid . They do not have to worry about ever becoming uninsurable , such as with diabetes or obesity , or heart ailment , cancer , or any other reason on earth . They are insured ! Their premiums will NEVER ever go up . They are locked in for the entire life , no matter what happens . As a kid , their rates are extremely low , so low they can be incredible . Every parent or grandparent should get life insurance on their children or grand kids . Love to help . Thank you . GARY LANE .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Can Homeowners Insurance Be Reinstated ?
In most cases yes . Depending on the reason for the lapse and the term of the lapse many carriers will allow the policy to be re-instated . Normally the lapse term can not be more than 30 days . If you have had a lapse in your coverage and want to see about getting the policy re-instated contact your local agent , they are the front and rear line when it comes to your coverage . They can help you get your insurance coverage back on track .
Michelle in New Jersey , What a sad story ! I 'm sure everyone sympathizes with you as I do , however there are rules that govern pretty much everything as you indicated that you are aware . So the answer to your question : When is a life insurance policy considered `` In Force '' ? is that the policy is in force when all the delivery requirements are met and the first premium is paid . In this case the policy was in force , but then lapsed thus it was no longer in force . Your husband applied for reinstatement , which reinstatement was approved according to your account , however the premium had not yet been paid , nor the approval been given by the insurer when your husband died . Therefore the policy was not in force on your husband 's death and the insurer is not obligated to pay the benefit . Even if your husband had submitted the reinstatement premium with his application for reinstatement , since the company had not approved or accepted the reinstatement before your husband died the policy did not meet the requirements for inforceability . Had he submitted the premium and the company accepted and approved the reinstatement before he died then the policy would have been in force and the company would be obligated to pay the benefit .
To reinstate a life insurance policy , you must first procure a reinstatement form from the life insurance company , or from the agent who sold you the policy . It will ask a lot of health questions , because being eligible for reinstatement requires that your health has not deteriorated since you took out the original policy . After you send that completed form back to the insurance company , it can take several weeks for them to review it , and decide whether or not you are allowed the reinstatement of your life insurance policy . If they say yes , you must pay all the premiums back to when the policy lapsed , to catch it up to the present . Your life insurance policy will be reinstated exactly to what it was when you first bought it .
Getting one 's life insurance policy reinstated is not difficult if there has not been a change of health . If your policy lapsed and you wish to try to reinstate it , you will be required to fill out a reinstatement form with health questions asked . If your health has gotten worse , you most likely will not be able to reinstate your policy at the rate you had before . Normally , this means that you must apply for a brand new policy . It is important to promptly notify your insurance company -LRB- not just your agent -RRB- when you have a change of address . If you are using automatic withdrawal from a bank account and switch banks , you must also notify the insurance company of that . The most common reason for a life insurance policy needing to be reinstated is because the policy payer moved and/or changed banks , and then did not get the premium paid on time due to not receiving the bill , or due to the the bank account being closed .
When a life insurance policy lapses , it means that the policy would no longer pay the death benefit if death of the insured person would occur . Policies lapse due to non-payment ; whether by accident or on purpose . When the policy lapses , there is usually a chance to reinstate it by filling out some paperwork and making up for the missed premium . However , reinstatement requires that the insured person 's health has not changed from the health rating it was when the policy was originally purchased . If unable to qualify for reinstatement a new policy will be needed .
That is a great question ! My advice would be to contact the company and ask where they sent the cash value for the policy , and / or if it could be reinstated . If it was indeed a whole life policy , and not a term policy , there should be a sizable amount of cash that is due to your father -LRB- assuming he 'd not borrowed from it -RRB- and they would be obligated to return it to him . If it was a term policy , there would have been no cash value , and the policy would have ended . If they will reinstate it for you , there will be a bit of paperwork , and back-owed premiums that will have to be paid , and please understand that for whatever reason , insurance companies are much more brutal about reinstating than they are just issuing a new policy . It may not hurt to have an attorney ... Good luck , and thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! Generally what happens is that if it can be addressed relatively quickly , the agent can request a reinstatement form . The applicant and the agent then fill out the application , and resubmit for coverage . That is the good news . The bad news is that the client will need to submit the premium that is back owed , plus generally two months in advance . That can be pretty pricey . The reinstatement process can take anywhere from 30-60 days . Thanks for asking !
Can life insurance be reinstated ? Yes it can , depending on what state you live in the window of opportunity can vary . In my state , a person actually has 6 months after canceling the policy to reinstate it . It may vary in other states . You should read your policy for specifics to your situation or call the carrier and ask .
Typically , to legally drive , you need to have a valid driver 's license . A suspended driver 's licence can be reinstated and under certain situations , you may receive special limited driving privileges . When a license is suspended , it can be reinstated . However , there may be special fees and paperwork that needs to be completed , such as an SR-22 Bond . When first applying for coverage , your rate is based on your age , the vehicle and your license status . So it 's important to properly shop for the best type of coverage , at , of course , the lowest rate . As experienced brokers , that 's our job . We essentially do the shopping for you , so you can get the best pricing . Our websites are specifically designed to help you compare the lowest rates , and easily apply for coverage .
Yes , you can be non renewed by your Homeowners Insurance provider under certain circumstances that are outlined in your Insurance Policy . Be sure to talk this over with your Insurance Professional , but I can give you a few examples . First , if you fail to pay your premium . There is a grace period in your policy no doubt and that is usually 30 days from the due or renewal date . Some companies would entertain a reinstatement with a lapse in coverage if payment is received within a fairly short period of time after the end of the grace period AND you sign a `` Statement of No Loss '' , but do n't count on those good graces . If an insurance company inspection identifies certain hazards relating to your home or property that can cause future loss , they will noitify you of these and advise you that they will need to have these remedied within a certain period of time . If the work is done , you will be good to go , however , if nothing is done , plan on our Insurance company sending you a non-renewal notice.Claims frequency and amounts paid on claims related to the premium you pay determine a `` Loss Ratio '' within the Underwriting standards of a Homeowners Insurance provider . Here again , if situations like that fall outside of an Insurance Company 's standards , they can non-renew .
Insurance without a vehicle is available . This is called non-owned auto coverage . Primarily used for people who are trying to get their license reinstated and a condition of reinstatement is you must carry auto insurance . Generally this is minimal coverage and has allot of restrictions so you want to discuss in detail with your agent when you purchase this coverage .
If a policy lapses you must fill out an application for reinstatement and pay all back premiums . As long as your health has n't changed there should be no problem . If the policy is less than a year old you can reinstate by redating with some companies . You have the policy reissued with a new issue date . This way you do not have to pay the back premiums .
If youre past the reinstatement period you are not covered . If you run out of cash values in a policy and the policy lapses you are not covered . If you inadvertently or deliberately let the policy go unpaid on its anniversary or month bank draft and you are past the reinstatement period you are not covered .
Generally speaking , the state will revoke your driver 's license . In order to reinstate your license you 'll need to provide proof of coverage , which is done most frequently by providing the Department of Motor Vehicles with form SR-22 . There will also likely be a fine that you pay to reinstate you license .
If youre past the reinstatement period you are not covered . If you run out of cash values in a policy and the policy lapses you are not covered . If you inadvertently or deliberately let the policy go unpaid on its anniversary or month bank draftand you are past the reinstatement period you are not covered .
There are a dozen or so statutory provisions -LRB- the number varies a little by state -RRB- that set the minimum legal standards for life insurance contracts - insurers can and usually do make their provisions better for the consumer . For example , most states require a 10 day `` free look '' period during which a policy owner can back out of the purchase but many insurers in recent years have been offering as much as 20 days . Some of the key provisions , after basics like parties to the contract , insurable interest , etc. , from a consumer 's perspective are : 1 . Grace period for premiums of one month 2 . Incontestable and Suicide clauses - insurer can not in most cases contest a claim after 2 years 3 . Nonforfeiture provisions -LRB- cash surrender , extended term and reduced paid up insurance -RRB- and the unofficial nonforfeiture provision , automatic premium loan 4 . Reinstatement clause - provision to reinstate lapsed coverage after the grace period 5 . Rights to naming and change beneficiary 6 . Settlement provisions - alternatives to taking proceeds as lump sum 7 . Policy loans 8 . Assignment rights
That is a great question ! The answer really depends upon why it was cancelled . If it was a couple of missed payments , you can usually be reinstated if you pay what you owe . If it was because of a suspension , you may be able to get it reinstated if you complete the terms of the suspension . If it was because of something worse , you may be out of luck , or forced to look for a `` last resort '' insurer , and be prepared to pay a ton for a little coverage . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
The automobile insurance policy has a start date and expiry date . Claims arising from the operation of the vehicle between those two dates and times are covered . Occasionally a company will reinstate a policy that has passed beyond the expiry date . To do so they will almost always require a statement that there werent any potential claims during the period from the expiry date and the date of reinstatement . In those cases the policy will often be back dated to provide continuous protection . This is important when there is a loss payee , such as a bank , that has the authority to order coverage for the vehicle .
It is pretty common and I dare say universal that a policy cancellation takes place at midnignt of the cancellation date . Reinstatements are timed at 12:01 AM . I have to be honest with you , If the fire occured at 12:50 AM and the payment was not processed until 11:00 AM , some eleven hours and ten minutes later , I would be prepared to deal with a pretty thorough investigation of the loss . Many companies require a `` No Loss Statement '' signed by the insured when payment is accepted to reinstate a lapsed policy , others may not .
Life insurance policyholders do n't lapse per se , but life insurance policies do . When a life insurance premium bill is received , there is a stated due date for the premium . The life insurance company then provides an additional 30 days past the due date before the policy lapses . Technically , coverage stops at the end of the 30 day lapse period if no premium is paid . After the lapse period , there is a 30 day reinstatement period , in which there is no coverage , but the missed premiums can be paid to put the policy back in-force . If premiums are not paid during the reinstatement period , the only way to continue coverage is to go back through medical underwriting .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How To Submit A Home Insurance Claim ?
You are going to have to determine what caused the damages and submit a claim appropriately . For example there may be water damage of a broken pipe or water damage form a flood . both are water damage but both are not typically covered under the homeowners policy . A broken pipe from say a freeze loss would be typically covered . A flood from a nearby stream would not be covered . In property insurance you may have contents to list and produce a notice of loss . Such an inventory is hard to do after the damage occurs . for that reason we recommend keeping an inventory of your important household goods away form your premises in a safe place .
-- > Normal 0 In the spirit of every reasonable insurance question is deserving of an answer , I submit . Tenant Homeowner or Renters policies cover damage to your personal property and food certainly would be considered Personal Property . As long as the power outage was caused by one of the named perils in your policy -LRB- fire , lightning , wind , vehicle damage , etc. -RRB- and it occurred on your premises , you may have a valid claim for food spoiled as a result of a power outage . But if the power outage was caused by something that occurred away from your residence , most Renters policies specifically exclude that type of loss unless the power outage then causes covered damage to your residence . Remember however , most Renters policies have a deductible of $ 250 or more so make sure you take that into consideration . Add to that the effect submitting a small claim , one less than $ 1000 , could have on your future premium or the willingness of your insurance company to renew your coverage . It may be a good idea to pass on submitting this type of claim even though you may have some coverage . In addition , most policies require you to take reasonable steps to preserve your property following a loss . Make sure you have done what you can to prevent your food from spoiling following a power outage . Some policies include a number of additional coverages , often an effort to make one companys policy appear more attractive than another . These additional coverages provide nominal amounts of insurance covering specific loss situations such as key replacement or food spoilage . Here again , you may be tempted to submit a claim because you have coverage but consider the impact a claim might have on future premiums and renewal terms . You may be better served to simply replace the food . When an event like this occurs , try to recall why you purchased insurance in the first place . More than likely , it wasnt to reimburse you if the food in your refrigerator went bad .
Let me differentiate between a liability claim and a property claim . If you are sued , notify the claims office of the insurance company immediately . Do not sign any papers and do not make any statements to agents of the individual or company suing you . Never hesitate to submit a liability claim . If your home is uninhabitable because of a covered loss such as fire or lightning call the insurance company claims office immediately . If you are the victim of a disaster , call the claims office immediately . Many insurance companies have mobile claims operations that are dispatched to help victims of disasters . Any damage to your home is a big deal . However , if the damage is not more than two times your deductible , and it pays to know your deductible , call your agent first . Property insurance policies have varying features that can either reduce the deductible or reduce the premium if your policy is claims free . Sometimes a little pencil work will show that it is better to forgo the claim as the reductions you receive for being claims free could be greater than the amount you would recover . If there is water damage and you can not reach your agent quickly enough contact the claims office because water damage only gets worse ! Often a quick responding water mitigation team can reduce and almost eliminate the loss .
Medicare is operated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- , which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services in cooperation with the Social Security Administration , it does not have a central claim-paying office for incoming claims . Rather , large insurance companies , chosen within each state , actually administer the claim payment process . So , from state to state , claim submissions are submitted to different entities . For example , claimants living in New Jersey submit claims to the New Jersey Medicare Claim Office .
It ultimately depends on how long it takes for you to submit a claim form -LRB- and any other documents your carrier requires -RRB- and the carrier to review and process the paperwork . If everything is in good order when you submit the paperwork , the entire process should take maybe a couple of weeks . If the carrier requests additional paperwork -LRB- e.g. something needs to be clarified -RRB- or the forms you submitted were not completed properly , then it could take a little longer than that . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I suppose Medicare can accept paper claims but I am not aware of any providers that submit paper claims . All provider claims for several years have been submitted electronically . Any medical provider that treats a Medicare beneficiary is required to file claims with Medicare regardless of whether they accept assignment or not .
The funding source of paying disability claims depends on who is backing up the promise to do so . 1 . Social Security DI is funded by tax-payers 2 . State-sponsored DI -LRB- if available -RRB- is usually funded by employers within that state . -LRB- A sole-proprietor that constitutes a company of one person may be able to `` opt in '' to the program with special enrollment . -RRB- 3 . Individual - or corporate-owned DI is funded by an insurance company that collects premiums from the individual or corporation to form a `` pool '' of money from which claims are paid . In any of these cases , the funding source must have sufficient funds in the pool to pay out legitimate claims as they are submitted . Premiums reflect the justified cost of maintaining that fund at the proper level . Therefore , claims may require a company to submit an application to the State Department of Insurance for increasing premiumsfora specified `` block of business '' within which claims will - or already have - exceeded premiums coming in for that block . -LRB- An individual can not be singled out for premium increases . -RRB- If one owns a policy that is `` non-cancelable '' , that term means that the carrier can not increase premiums for any reason over the life of the policy .
How does a health insurance claim work ? Let 's follow a claim . First the billing is created in the doctor 's office where staff submits a claim for payment to an insurance company . This could be done anywhere from that day or later that month , depending on the office . I have known of providers who have sent collection notices before they 've even gotten around to billing . When the claim arrives at the insurance company it goes straight to the claims departement where the informaion is entered into the computers . Basically the claims person gets the bill , data entries the necessary information and hits enter . From that point on , most claims are untouched by human hands . The claim information goes into the computer where it is compared to the coverage the insured has . From that a payment and explaination of benefits page are created and sent on their ways . When I use the term untouched by human hands I mean not everything processed is checked to see if the parameters -LRB- plan design -RRB- are correct . Usually , only billings above a certain size are rechecked for accuracy . Years ago the threshold was 20,000 got a second look by a human for accuracy . Companies leave it up to the insured to find any small errors and call in for corrections . The cost of double checking every claim would be astronomical .
Your homeowner 's insurance will pay for a new roof if the claim you submit is covered under the policy . For example , fire , heavy wind , tornado , and other weather-related claims are typically covered . However , the normal wear and tear of a roof is not a situation where you can submit for a claim .
Well , kind of . If you have established an account at mymedicare.gov you can review claims submitted and adjudicated by Medicare . If you have a Medigap plan , your mymedicare account will show if those claims have been submitted to your gap carrier or not . Medicare Advantage participants can review claims at their carrier site .
If your doctor accepts assignment Medicare pays them directly once the claim is submitted , adjudicated and approved . Fees are based on ICD-9 -LRB- diagnosis -RRB- and CPT-4 -LRB- treatment -RRB- coding for services rendered . Once the claim is approved Medicare submits the claim via crossover to your Medicare supplement plan carrier that is on record .
Turn around from visit to payment is usually around 30 days or less . For most insurance carriers , their goal is payment within five days of receipt . Receipt is the big deal as some medical offices hold claims and submit in batches through the month . I have had experience with medical offices sending late notices or threats of collection without ever mailing the claim to be processed . For a claim to be paid , it first has to be submitted .
The answer to your question will vary somewhat depending upon where you are getting your health insurance . Are you a new employee anticipating your employer based coverage ? Or , are you a person looking for a personal , individual major medical insurance plan ? After January 1 , 2014 in the employer based setting and under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act , once you are hired as a full-time eligible employee or your hours are increased to full-time status , then the employer can not have a waiting period that exceeds 90 calendar days from the date you become eligible . So , an employer can have a waiting period of anywhere from `` date of hire '' to the 90 calendar days from date of hire . For administrative and payroll keeping purposes I am finding most employers are opting for a policy on a new hire becoming eligible for coverage on the `` first day of the month following 60-days '' . In the individual health insurance world we do have to keep the new open enrollment periods in mind and how failure to enroll during this annual election period can impact a person 's eligibility for health insurance coverage between open enrollment times . In other words , if you `` just did n't get around to it '' and you 've had no change of life status event since open enrollment closed then you ca n't take out a major medical health insurance policy until the next open enrollment period for a 1st of the year start date at best . -LRB- If you qualify you can take out a Short Term Medical policy to carry you through until then -RRB- Assuming yours is a normal individual major medical enrollment then the following rules of thumb apply to when your effective date of coverage is supposed to be ; 1 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted on or before the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the next month . For example , an enrollment submitted on December 10th would be for an effective date of January 1st . 2 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted after the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the following month . For example , an application is submitted on December 20th would be for an effective date of February 1st . Open enrollment season for 2015 begins on November 15th , 2014 and runs through February 15th , 2015 .
Immediately ! Call your agent or insurer and get started on that process . Claims can take a while to resolve or they can be resolved quickly . If you have a police report or evidence ready to go as soon as you file your claim , it can often get fixed faster . That said , you can usually submit your evidence after the initial filing . I 'm not aware of any company that wo n't let you submit evidence after filing your claim but there are a lot of companies out there . Long-short of it , file as soon as possible .
My father passed away this February and my mom got the benefits from his policies a few weeks after submitting the death claims . Getting the certified death certificate to submit with the death claim actually took about as long as getting the life insurance payments did . One of these policies was taken out in 1945 . Life insurance is an amazing thing .
To answer this question , I will assume that it is posed to determine if a homeowner policy will cover any type of damage to an air conditioner , absent any other facts . The homeowner policy is definitely not a maintenance policy and therefore will not pay for damage to the unit , unless it is damaged by the occurrence of some other type of covered peril . For example , if it is a relatively expensive ` window unit ' and a heavy picture falls off of the wall , striking and severely damaging the ac unit , there could be coverage , subject to the application of the homeowner policy deductible . In reality , you should think twice about the future premium increase ramifications of submitting a smallish claim of this nature . You would , in a situation of this nature , check with your agent to make sure it is worth submitting . If it is a central ac unit and is damaged by a fire in the garage caused by a carelessly laid cigar , there would be coverage , again subject to the deductible . The financial loss for a central ac unit would no doubt be much more extensive that for a window unit and might therefore merit claim submission . Also , the fire described would probably have damaged the walls , ceiling , possibly stored objects , etc. , and produced smoke damage to other parts of a house , if attached , justifying submission of a broader claim for damages , including those to the ac unit .
If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a renter 's loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Renter 's '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you as the insured must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value.Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52 inch HD TV when it was actually an 18 inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed .
Medigap , also known as Medicare Supplement Insurance and Plan F , payments go directly to the service provider . It is best to ask in advance whether your doctor , provider or supplier has accepted assignment . Participating providers have signed an agreement for all Medicare covered services . Participating providers have also agreed to charge you only the Medicare deductible and coinsurance amount and usually wait for Medicare to pay its share before asking you to pay your share . They have to submit your claim directly to Medicare and can not charge you for submitting the claim .
The timing of life insurance becoming effective depends on a few things . If you apply for life insurance and submit the minimum initial premium with the application , the company 's `` conditional receipt '' will determine when the coverage begins . Each company 's terms will be a little different . If you applied for the insurance without submitting any premium , the coverage usually would n't begin until after the application is approved and you submit the initial premium .
-- > Normal 0 If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a homeowners policy loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Homeowners '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value . Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52-inch HD TV when it was actually an 18-inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed . Dont be afraid to request one .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What License Is Needed To Sell Long Term Care Insurance ?
A health insurance license is needed to sell long term care insurance . Also , there is a partnership long term care education course that is required to sell long term care policies . However , many of the same companies that offer life insurance are the ones that offer long term care insurance , in addition to some companies that mainly offer health insurance .
To sell long term care insurance all states require a health insurance license . Some states like KY , require you qualify for both life and health insurance , as they do not have a health insurance license stand alone . There are other states like NC , that require a health license and a special long term care certificate with your health insurance license . It is always a good idea to check your resident state 's DOI website for specific requirements .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
The agents who sell Long Term Care Insurance are licensed in Health Insurance . However , many life insurance companies also sell Long Term Care Insurance , and many agents who specialize in Life Insurance also sell Long Term Care Insurance . You can input `` Long Term Care Insurance Quotes '' in a search engine to bring up a list of companies and how to reach them , or a broker who sells their products .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
A health insurance license is needed to sell long term care insurance . Also , there is a partnership long term care education course that is required to sell long term care policies . However , many of the same companies that offer life insurance are the ones that offer long term care insurance , in addition to some companies that mainly offer health insurance .
To sell Long Term Care Insurance you must be licensed in Health Insurance and also take training about partnership long term care insurance . You must be understand the different aspects of long term care insurance , or use a broker who can explain those for you . The hardest part about selling long term care insurance is that it is difficult for many to afford , or part with , the premium , and the part of human nature that says `` that will never happen to me '' kicks in . But if you have the right market -LRB- people with assets to protect and enough income to pay the premium -RRB- and understand the implications of long term care insurance yourself , it helps .
To be come a Long Term Care Insurance agent , you first need to get licensed in Health Insurance . This requires taking a test and paying the appropriate fees for licensing . Then you must be certified to sell Long Term Care by taking another test to show adequate knowledge of Partnership Long Term Care policies . You must get contracted with the carriers whose policies you wish to sell . Then develop your clientele .
Variable life insurance is another form of whole life insurance . There is no special license needed . As long as you have a license to sell life insurance you would be able to sell variable life . Which license you need to sell life insurance varies state to state . In my state of Florida all you need is a 2-15 or a 2-14 license .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Yes , you do need a license to sell life insurance in Maine . If selling products that do not involve securities , the license is simply called a Life Insurance Producer 's License issued by the Maine Department of Insurance . It requires passing an exam and paying fees to get that type of license . Selling variable products also require a couple of securities licenses .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
To sell long term care insurance all states require a health insurance license . Some states like KY , require you qualify for both life and health insurance , as they do not have a health insurance license stand alone . There are other states like NC , that require a health license and a special long term care certificate with your health insurance license . It is always a good idea to check your resident state 's DOI website for specific requirements .
Long term care insurance can be bought from agents licensed in health insurance . Many of the same companies who offer long term care insurance also offer life insurance . So try contacting a website or office that sells either of these products to see if they also sell long term care insurance .
Most basically a life insurance license is a license to sell life insurance . But you can think of it as a certificate issued by the State that certifies that the holder of the license has studied the laws governing life insurance and the practices involved , and has passed rigorous tests to verify that the person knows those laws and the serious consequences of violating them . The life insurance license makes the person eligible to be appointed by life insurance companies to sell their fixed life insurance and annuity products . THen the licensed person has to learn all about the products the company offers before they can actually sell them .
The license you need to sell annuities depends on the type of annuity you intend to sell . For fixed and indexed annuities you need a regular life insurance license . For variable annuities you will need a securities license , specifically a FINRA series 6 license . A FINRA series 7 license will also work .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Personal Auto Insurance Cover Rental Vehicles ?
There are a couple of angles on this question . And as always , check with your agent . Coverage varies by state and insurance company . In Illinois , your owned vehicle insurance policy generally extends coverage to the temporary use of a rental car , rented in the 50 states and Canada . The same coverage applies . That means that if you do NOT have physical damage coverages on your own policy , i.e. collision and comprehensive , you wo n't have them for the rental vehicle either . You would then need to purchase the physical damage waiver from the rental agency . All of this discussion refers to the rental of a private passenger vehicle . If you 're moving and rent a truck for your belongings , your personal auto insurance will probably not cover it . If the original question relates to coverage to pay for a rental vehicle , most companies provide the optional coverage in the event of a covered claim .
Without specifics , `` it depends ... '' on what state the policy is written in . I am in New York and the NY Personal Auto Policy is required -LRB- by statute -RRB- to have some type of `` Rental Vehicle Coverage Endorsement ' . It is not optional . The endorsement sets forth an Insuring Agreement , Definitions , Priority of Payment , Exclusions , Subrogation , Duties after an Accident or Loss , and General Provisions . Coverage for the actual damage to or loss ofthe rental vehicle -LRB- with limitations -RRB- is provided ` regardless of fault . ' The endorsement does not set forth value or limit . Theoretically , I can rent a Rolls Royce , total it , and my carrier most likely pays the rental company the $ 350,000 value of the car including loss of use . My NY Rental Vehicle Coverage does not pay the ` reduction/diminution in value of the vehicle ' in the event it is repairable - thiscoveragecannot be added to my policy . Diminution of Value coverage is available through the physical damage insurance offered by the rental company -LRB- aka the collision damage waiver , etc -RRB- . A thorough reading of an Erie Personal Auto Insurance policy issued in your state is warranted as my answer only applies to theNew York Personal Auto Policy . Commercial or Business auto policies address rental vehicles in a different manner - a topic for a separate question .
Auto coverage will vary slightly depending on your state . However auto insurance is typically broken down into the following coverages : Liability Bodily Injury - Pays to cover the medical expenses of the damaged party -LRB- typically another driver and their passengers -RRB- if you cause an accident . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . There is a limit per person and an aggregate limit per accident . Liability Physical Damage - Pays to cover damage to vehicles or other physical property -LRB- mailbox , guardrail , traffic signal , etc. -RRB- caused by the insured -LRB- you -RRB- . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . Uninsured Motorist Liability & Uninsured Motorist Physical Damage - This coverage protects the insured against motorists without insurance or with insufficient limits to cover medical and physical damages to the insured . This pays up to the per person and aggregate limits listed on the policy . Collision - Pays the cost to repair/replace your vehicle if you hit something/someone minus the deductible listed on your policy . Note that if your vehicle is a total loss then you will be compensated based on the actual cash value of your vehicle which is the value of your vehicle considering depreciation . Other Than Collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- - This coverage pays to repair/replace your vehicle for theft , vandalism , hail , damage by animals , etc minus the deductible on your policy . If your vehicle is a total loss it will be valued on an actual cash value basis . Personal Injury Protection - Pays for medical/disability expenses of the insured for an injury occurring in or around your vehicle up to the limit listed on the policy . Accidental Death & Dismemberment - Small life insurance component often added to auto policies that will pay a death benefit if you die or are permanently disabled in an auto accident . Towing/Roadside Assistance - Varies significantly by company and state Rental Coverage - Covers the cost of a rental vehicle for the time that your vehicle is in the shop due to a covered loss . There are multiple levels and this coverage may not cover the full cost of the rental .
My previous career was for a rental company so I have a great deal of knowledge in this area . When determining purchasing insurance when renting a car it is important to consider these main factors . 1 -RRB- Quality of your own insurance policy If you have state minimum coverage dont except much help from your insurance company if something were to happen . 2 -RRB- Purpose of Rental - Yes , The reason why you are renting the car plays a big factor . Some insurance policies will only cover rental vehicles if it is a replacement rental . So if you are renting for a family vacation there is a possibility that you arent covered . Always check with your insurance company . 3 -RRB- Type of Vehicle Another huge factor , a lot of policies wont cover any vehicles that are built on a pick up truck frame . Most consumers are unaware that some minivans and SUVs are in fact built upon a pickup truck frames . The best way to protect yourself against this is to always rent a vehicle that similar to the car on your policy -LRB- If you have a SUV on your policy , you should be safe to drive a SUV -RRB- 4 -RRB- Does your credit card cover it ? A little known benefit -LRB- that most credit cards have -RRB- is rental coverage ! Some will require you to activate it before renting a vehicle while others will give it you automatically . I would always check with your credit card provider to see which type of coverage you have . They often pay for loss-of-use as well which is an extra bonus that most insurance policies wont cover . 5 -RRB- The Length of the rental - The longer the rental the more expensive the rental insurance becomes . At some point the amount of money you are paying for the extra insurance isnt going to be worth it . That breaking point is up to you to decide . 6 -RRB- If something were to happen right now , what can you afford ? I think this is the most important . The most common rental is a 3 day weekend rental . The typical insurance cost for that that length of time can be $ 60 to $ 200 . However , the cost of damage , loss of use , and deductibles can add up to be $ 2,000 and get as high as the total loss value of the vehicle . If you were to total out a vehicle would your insurance cover it ? Or could you afford a $ 20,000 vehicle that you wont drive ? 7 -RRB- Remember it is not your vehicle ! Very often damage happens to our own vehicle and we dont even notice or care because we consider the damage to be minimal . However this is not the case when renting a vehicle . You do not have control over what damages are fixed and which ones arent . So Keep in mind that a ding to you , could be consider major damage to them . At the end of the day , you have to be honest with yourself and determine if purchasing the extra insurance is worth it or not . Not every situation is a same and multiple factors needs to be taken into account .
There are a couple of angles on this question . And as always , check with your agent . Coverage varies by state and insurance company . In Illinois , your owned vehicle insurance policy generally extends coverage to the temporary use of a rental car , rented in the 50 states and Canada . The same coverage applies . That means that if you do NOT have physical damage coverages on your own policy , i.e. collision and comprehensive , you wo n't have them for the rental vehicle either . You would then need to purchase the physical damage waiver from the rental agency . All of this discussion refers to the rental of a private passenger vehicle . If you 're moving and rent a truck for your belongings , your personal auto insurance will probably not cover it . If the original question relates to coverage to pay for a rental vehicle , most companies provide the optional coverage in the event of a covered claim .
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
Your auto insurance will cover you when you rent a car with the samecoverage ` syou currently carry on your personal auto policy . All rules , coverage 's deductibles and limits apply . A rental car is considered a temporary substitute vehicle . Keep in mind this must be avehicleof theprivatepassenger type , not U-hauls or commercialvehicles . Also renting a vehicle does not give you permission to loan the vehicle toanotherparty as all operators must be listed on the rental agreement . I recommend you call your insurance carrier before renting a vehicle to make sure your policycoverage ` sare adequate .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
You 're going to want to read your policy . Often times , your auto insurance will extend the highest level of coverage on your policy to a vehicle you are driving with permission or renting . If you have full coverage -LRB- ie . comprehensive and collision coverage -RRB- , you would be extended full coverage . However , almost all insurance policies exclude coverage for loss of use of that other vehicle and will only pay market value for the loss of the vehicle . So , if you are in an accident with a rental car , the rental company has the right to charge you for each day it is out of service being repaired -LRB- YOU PAY THIS , NOT INSURANCE -RRB- . Also , if the auto company has a value on the books of $ 20,000 for the vehicle and your insurance company only pays $ 15,000 for the car in a total loss , you are responsible for the difference . EVERY insurance agent who knows anything , would tell you to take the third party insurance coverage . If you plan ahead however , Travel Guard by Chartis offers the same coverage the rental companies will , minus liability which would be through your insurance , to protect against the loss of use and the difference in value .
Always check with your insurance professional before renting a car . Generally speaking , unless you have special limits found in a non standard policy , the coverage you have on your personal auto policy does extend over to rental cars while they temporarily replace yours . Keep in mind , though that if you have an older car , for example , and are not carrying Collision on your policy , you will not have collision on the rental . The Liability coverage you have transfers fully , but comp and collision only transfer if you have them . Remember though that I referred to a rental car . This extension of coverage does not necessarily include rental vans or trucks used for moving or hauling.One other thing to keep in mind . Many credit card ccontracts provide some limited coverage if used when renting a car.This is usually up to $ 500.00 which may be enough to cover the deductible from your personal auto policy .
I would recommend it as while your auto insurance may cover some of the damage to the rental car , it typically will not cover all of it . And then there is the loss of use issue for the rental company and the income lost by the rental company while the vehicle is being repaired . The insurance that the rental company offers will normally provide coverage for the things that your auto coverage would not . Every policy is different so please read your policy completely to know what is covered and what is excluded or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Geico auto insurance , like most companies can cover the cost of your rental car if it is used as a substitute vehicle . This assumes your vehicle was involved in a covered accident and you have added -LRB- if needed -RRB- the rental car provision on your policy . It typically provides coverage for a rental vehicle for up to 30 days .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
If you are referring to a rental car , yes your auto insurance would provide coverage if you have full coverage -LRB- collision and otherthan collision coverage -RRB- on your vehicle with a rental car endorsement . Typically this coverage is a limited dollar amount per day up to 30 days . If you were not at fault for the accident and the other party 's insurance is paying for the damage to your vehicle they may pay for a rental car while your vehicle is in the shop . Read your policy completely to know your coverages and exclusions or contact your local agent to have them go over the coverage and exclusions offered .
You must have insurance when you rent a car . You have the option to either purchase the insurance offered by the rental car agency or if you personal policy extends you have the option to use your own personal auto insurance coverage . Always check with your agent to see if your own insurance will cover you in a rental car . The rental car agency is not going to let you rent their vehicle without insurance .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
All auto insurance can provide you reimbursement for auto rentals ONLY IF you get that endorsement on your policy . The typical reimbursement for rental cars is $ 20/day up to $ 600 total . Most insurance companies will let you increase this up to around $ 50/day and $ 1,500 total . There is no standardized wording for this endorsement , either . I have seen it called `` rental reimbursement , '' `` rental coverage , '' `` rental guarantee . '' So , when you are looking through your policy to see if you have some type of rental coverage you need to look carefully .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Can I Get Health Insurance Online In Texas ?
Recommend that you go to www.healthcare.gov but if you did not have an application started by March 31st or if you are not eligible for a Special Enrollment Period you may have to wait till regular annual open enrollment which is in November . Feel free to contact me if you have any questions !
If you are able to get on the Healthcare.gov site today , start an account . If you can at least get that far , then there is a few day extension that gives you a little more time to finish , if the site continues to be bogged down with last minute shoppers . There are several non-government sites that you can shop in , but it is not always the case that the prices and/or coverages are comparable , nor might they offer the payment assistance that you may qualify for on the Government site . That is not to say that you could n't find a good policy , it 's just wise to compare before buying , just as you should any major purchase . Please contact me through my link , if you have more questions .
You can get health insurance online in Texas ! The easiest and most efficient way to obtain the best rates and best coverage is through an experienced broker . That 's our job and why we have top-rated websites . The . gov website is still not free from glitches , delays and security concerns . And most experienced health insurance brokers can offer `` off-Exchange '' plans which you can not get through the government website . A broker will help determine the amount of your federal subsidy , so you can view how much your Texas health insurance rate will reduce and which options are the best . If you missed Open Enrollment , a broker can review short-term plan options and other viable choices .
There are several independent agencies -LRB- such as ours -RRB- that have websites that allow people to run health insurance quotes online and you can be reviewing plans in about a minute or two . It gives you instant information on plans from the major carriers and you can follow up with a licensed agent to get your questions answered . On our website it is under the `` other '' tab to go to under 65 health insurance . It is a great way to save a lot of time and get a full understanding of what health insurance plans are available in Texas .
You can get health insurance online in Texas ! The easiest and most efficient way to obtain the best rates and best coverage is through an experienced broker . That 's our job and why we have top-rated websites . The . gov website is still not free from glitches , delays and security concerns . And most experienced health insurance brokers can offer `` off-Exchange '' plans which you can not get through the government website . A broker will help determine the amount of your federal subsidy , so you can view how much your Texas health insurance rate will reduce and which options are the best . If you missed Open Enrollment , a broker can review short-term plan options and other viable choices .
If you are age 65 and receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be enrolled in Medicare . Otherwise , you can go to medicare.gov to read how to apply for Medicare in Texas . You will be walked through the instructions step by step and be able to apply online , if you like . You can also go to a local Texas Social Security office to apply for Medicare .
To get life insurance online in Texas , go to a website offering free , instant quotes , and enter your information . If a quote comes up for you , then that policy is probably offered in Texas . From there you can contact the agency , or they will most likely contact you , to confirm that you are qualified for that rate . You will be able to apply for the policy via mailed , emailed , faxed or digitally signed application . Once approved , you will receive the policy by mail .
You will need a new vehicle registration in Texas and with it a new Texas policy . there are honestly some differences in coverage that are routine in Texas and not so much in Georgia . For example in Texas you typically can buy PIP which is Personal Injury Protection which affords you and your passengers some coverages including wage loss that are not usually offered in GA. . In Ga most folks have medical payments coverage in lieu of PIP . It is not the same but is more limited . Keep in mind that much of auto insurance revolves around complying with state law . The DMV in both states gets a data feed form the companies on policies as they incept and as they are cancelled . With the situation you describe I think our agency may uniquely able to assist you . We currently are licensed in both states and can assist with your transition . So give us a call 1 - 866-933-4372
Texas is just like any other state . The best Medicare supplemental insurance plan is the one that matches your needs and is affordable . Medigap insurance rates vary considerably by zip code , age , tobacco use and plan . Medicare Plan F is the most expensive plans in Texas , and the most popular . It is also the plan that pays the agent the highest commission . Sometimes you can find instant Medicare rates online but you really should talk to a broker if you want to find the best rates .
There are several independent agencies -LRB- such as ours -RRB- that have websites that allow people to run health insurance quotes online and you can be reviewing plans in about a minute or two . It gives you instant information on plans from the major carriers and you can follow up with a licensed agent to get your questions answered . On our website it is under the `` other '' tab to go to under 65 health insurance . It is a great way to save a lot of time and get a full understanding of what health insurance plans are available in Texas .
First , I would consult an attorney in Texas to find out how Life Insurance is treated when there is a divorce . Generally speaking from my experience as a divorced father , Life Insurance is not an issue unless there is cash value which can be withdrawn . And if the Life Insurance was purchased during the marriage . If it was purchased prior , then it most likely would not be an issue . I know this is vague , which is why I recommend consulting an attorney in Texas .
The Texas Health Insurance Exchange was created to give Texas residents the opportunity to purchase affordable medical coverage from the top insurers in the state . Open Enrollment will begin October 1 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and policies will be effective in 2014 . Texas consumers can buy single , family and small business healthcare through the Exchange or with the help of experienced licensed brokers -LRB- and websites -RRB- . The new federal tax subsidy could possibly reduce premiums for persons that qualify . The `` Federal Poverty Level '' will be used to calculate eligibility and amount of the subsidy . Licensed and/or experienced brokers can also assist with this calculation .
Yes typically it is covered and covered on a replacement cost basis . Due to the frequency of major hail and windstorms in several states , we are seeing several companies offer only Actual cash value for older rooftops . So be sure you understand what your coverage is and how it will respond to a hail or windstorm -LRB- tornado or hurricane -RRB- . In some state per cent deductibles have been in use for decades such as in Texas . However much of the country has dollar amount deductibles . Also be aware that coverage is not automatically available in the voluntary market in all areas of coastal states So if you live in the fourteen counties in Texas along the Gulf or in Florida every where , you may have to obtain wind and hail coverage through a residual market mechanism such as the Texas Wind Insurance Association or Citizens Property Insurance in FL . A local agent in any coastal state should be a good starting point to understand what is available and where in your part of the country .
You can also go to the website for the Social Security Administration at www.SSA.gov for information and to sign up . One important thing to remember when signing up for Medicare in Texas is that you have a one time open enrollment period when you first sign up for Medicare Part B . This means there are no health underwriting questions and you can select any Medicare Supplement plan available . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of your medical costs . The Medicare Supplement is designed to cover the remaining 20 % or some variation depending on what plan you go with . We have helped many clients through the Medicare Supplement process in Texas . You can compare Texas Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
Greetings ! You have asked a very key question . To be honest , the short answer is ... It depends . Yes , I know not exactly what you were looking for . Let me step back and explain . The answer to your question depends not only on what company you take you coverage through , but also which policy type you elect . I agree with Felicia , who answered first , when she says consult with your agent . I would also suggest looking for information through OPIC if your are in Texas I suggest checking it out . It gives consumersinsurance information on Auto , Home ... etc. . They are : opic.state.tx.us online .
The average cost of life insurance in Texas depends on the person . Young people with excellent health pay far less than older persons with poor health . The type of policy also enters in , with permanent insurance having a higher price tag than term . To find the average price for a particular person in Texas , go to a website quote engine that provides quotes for your state . If you choose an instant quoter , you can input different face amounts and terms and see how they vary .
It depends . What is your specific situation - how many vehicles do you have , how many drivers are in your household ? Do any drivers have any tickets or accidents in the last 3 years ? Do you own a home and/or have other assets ? These are just a few of the questions that we 'll look to get answered to help us determine the best path for you.Please understand that there are several great auto insurance companies here in Texas ; every situation is unique and has it 's own factors that will determine how to proceed in securing the best autoinsurance coverage for your unique situation . I guess the best answer is which auto insurance company can best fit and satisfy your current situation and current needs?Give us a call at 469.206.8048 or you can e-mail me at WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your situation to get you the protection you need .
That is a great question ! Here in Texas , it is 30 days , but each State will have its own regulations as to the time period they will allow to pass before ticketing you for not being properly registered . I had to have a policy that was issued in Texas before being able to register my car and get plates , you may need to switch your policy first also . I 'd recommend going on line to your new State 's Department of Motor Vehicles or Secretary of State webpage and see what your State requires . Good luck with your move , and thank you for asking !
Generally speaking yes . Windstorm is covered by your homeowners policy , but maybe treated separately by your policy as well . For example if you live in a coastal area wind coverage may be excluded and you obtain what coverage is available through a pooling arrangement such as a wind pool . For Example if you live in Galveston Texas you might you need three policies where as an inland customer would only need one.In Galveston your wind policy might be through the Texas Wind Insurance Association , your regular homeowners policy in the private market -LRB- exclusive of wind -RRB- . You may also be required to have a flood policy -LRB- from the National Flood Insurance Program -RRB- because your insurer does not want to see you in a dilemma of having one group say the damage was caused by wind borne water and another saying it is flood coverage after the loss . To keep your understanding of what is necessary visit with your agent and discuss your personal situation . One other thing I should mention is that depending on where you live you may have a separate , hurricane deductible , wind and hail deductible , named storm deductible . These are often per cent deductibles and can mean a substantial out of pocket costs in the event of a windstorm . They are not exclusively used in hurricane prone areas . For example in Austin Texas you might have a $ 1000 deductible for most homeowners coverage -LRB- perils -RRB- , but 1 % wind and hail deductible even though Austin is over 200 miles to the Gulf .
There is no real significant premium difference in Texas , than in any other state except perhaps New York . If you go online with any life insurance brokerage firm , you can generate a spreadsheet that displays the premium of some of the top companies in the country.You can change out the state to compare premium pricing to verify the costs by state .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can Auto Insurance Companies See My Driving Record ?
When you apply for auto insurance coverage with a carrier they pull your MVR record from your driver 's license information that you have provided . If the carrier is not able to secure your driving record information they may either decline providing coverage to you or possibly surcharge their base rates .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
In California the answer is anabsoluteyes . California is governed by proposition 103guidelinesand one of the major rating factors is driving record . Every personal lines auto insurance carrier must rate according to your driving record so 1 point will have an impact . This impact can be quite significant . 2 points in a 3 year period and you are no longer considered a California a good driver . This can cause rates to easily double in many cases . I often see clients who move in from out of state who have points on their driving record get a big shock to find out there rates areaffectedby a ticket . So what is a point you may ask . Any minor moving violation is 1 point . A major moving violation can be 2 points with a DUI coming in at 4 points . A minor at-fault accident is 1 point . A at-fault accident that includes bodily injury is 2 points . You may attend traffic school for a minor violation in most areas once every 18 months . All the rest you just have to wait out the 3 years until the points drop off your record . Also some insurance carriers reward drivers for clean driving records that go beyond 3 years so even though your points may have dropped off you still may not be receiving the best rates possible until 5-7 years . And by the way , Insurance carriers in California will check the driving record once a year minimum if not more often . If you move from one carrier to the next an upfront motor vehicle record is always ran .
Autoinsurance companies must see your driving record in order to properly rate your auto insurance policy . Once a quote has been offered an agent will ask your permission to run your motor vehicle record in order to validate the rate . Should any violations or accidents show up on the record that were not disclosed the rate would be adjust accordingly . If you are with an existing insurance provider the carrier will usually run your record on an annual basis to see if there is any activity and adjust rates accordingly or possibly chose not to offer a renewal due to high activity on your driving record .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
Yes the internet is flooded with thousands of insurance companies , insurance brokers , agents offering auto insurance rates online . It just takes a few minutes and few clicks on the mouse . The best thing about getting auto insurance is the competition among the carriers . Because of such competition , many of them offer the cheapest auto insurance rates for you . Shopping for the best auto insurance rates on the internet allows you the option whether or not to talk to an agent as well . Make sure when online have your old policy ready so you can refer to it for some of the questions you will have to answer . When buying a policy online or offline make sure you fully disclose your driving record . In some States while youre at it , check your credit score . Some auto insurance companies will not run your driving record at the time of purchase but they will run it on the back end and once they find out about your driving history and your credit , your rates will increase . So do the research before you buy .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Auto insurance companies do not share information directly but all information is shared . Insurance companies report incidents to a data base which is then accessed by insurance companies when needed . For example you have an at-fault auto accident and your rates go up . You are upset about this so you shop around for insuranceelsewhere The new company will check the data base for your driving record to see if you have tickets or accidents and then crate your insurance policy accordingly . While incidents on your record may only effect you for a short period of time . For minor incidents 3 years . I have seen data show up that was 10 years old .
Not usually depending on the company . If you are changing companies sometimes you could lose a discount but it depends on how the companies underwriting is set up . In most cases just having one point on your license will not raise your rates , in fact many companies , other than periodic spot checking , will only check your driving record if you have an accident or claim or at the time you take out your policy . I have seen drivers with as high as six points getting preferred rates because the company had not checked their driving record . Each company is different and each company varies on how often they check driving records .
This question can not be answered by anyone execpt the insurance companies underwriters and their managers . Auto insurance is rated on numerous factors : what city the car is kept in , what safety features does the car have , what offenses are on your driving record , your age and etc. . This is just a few rating factors insurance companies consider . Then , to make this more complicated , each factor has its own weight within a given insurance company . For example , I live in Michigan and have a not at fault accident on my record . A regional insurance carrier counts that against me to increase my premium cost and price me out of its market . A national carrier , on the other hand , does not count the accident against me , whichmakes my premium muchlower . In summary , it really depends upon your insurance carrier . My best advice is to contact your agent and have him ask how this will effect the renewal rate -LRB- keep in mind your insurance carrier might issue a non-renewal because of your DWI -RRB- . If it will go up considerably you might want to consider shopping around .
Many factors can keep your auto insurance rates down . First would be a clean driving record . No moving violations in the last 3 years and no at-fault accidents . The longer your driving record is clean the better as some insurance carriers discount if clean for 5-7 years . Being married tends to lower your rate . Packaging polices such as home and umbrella tend to lower auto insurance rates . If your a student having a 3.0 or better will lower your rate . Making sure there is no gaps in your insurance will also help to get you a better rate depending on the state you reside in . Credit is another factor for some states and of course the type of car you drive , how many miles you drive annually and coverage 's you select all are factors in your rate . Insurance coverage is consultative which is why I recommend you talk to a local independent agent who can help find you the right coverage 's at the right premium .
Another term for Substandard Auto Insurance is High Risk . Auto insurance rates are based on driving record , age , insurance credit score and claim history . If your driving record falls below what a company considers a standard risk they put you in substandard . While it varies by company , most companies will allow two or three tickets or At Fault accidents before putting you in substandard . A DUI will automatically put you in substandard . Insurance laws vary by state .
It depends on a few different things . First , the type of vehicle will affect the policy premium . For example , a 2005 Toyota Corolla would typically have a lower premium than a 2005 Cadillac Escalade due to the cost difference in the vehicle and the cost difference in the repairs of the vehicle.Second , the driving record of the insured will affect the policy premium . For example , someone with one speeding ticket and an at fault accident will have a higher policy premium than someone with no speeding tickets or accidents . Thisis due to the fact that the insurance companieswill see that person witha ticket and accident as a greater risk to insure than the other person with a clean driving record . Third , the garaged location -LRB- home -RRB- of the vehicle will affect the policy premium . If you are garaging your vehicle in an area with a high rate of auto theft or vandalism the policy premium will be higher than in an area with a low rate of auto theft or vandalism . Again , this goes back to a greater risk for the insurance company . There are many more rating factors that the insurance companies use and they differ from state to state . Here in Arizona , for example , they will look at your credit score , occupation , and highest level of education in order to provide you with a price on coverage .
Your driving record is a major determinant of the price of your auto policy . Most auto policies charge if you have received either a citation or been involved in an accident in which the company had to pay . Some companies advertise that your good driving record can give you forgiveness should you have the one unusual accident .
Having a poor driving record can cause life insurance rates to go up , or even cause a policy to be postponed or declined . However , there are usually No Exam policies to turn to if a medically underwritten policy is declined due to driving record . Some aspects of the driving record that can affect rates or approval are : the number of tickets within the past few years , drug or alcohol related driving violations , repeat convictions , and suspended drivers license .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
Every year , make and model of automobile is assigned a specific symbol . The symbols are alphabetical . The symbol tracks the experience the industry and the company have with that particular year , make and model . As you can imagine a manufacturer like Mercedes Benz has a wide variety of symbols . The symbol is but a part of the computation of the premium . The insurance companies in California are restricted to a few criteria to further evaluate the risk . The California insurers will look at the driving record of every driver in the household and will assess points if there are violations present , particularly with the assigned driver . The points based upon a drivers record have a compounding effect because in California a driver with less than two points is considered a good driver and awarded a substantial discount . Another factor that influences the company is the presence of inexperienced drivers . The accident record of the household is also considered closely . Claims for bodily injury receive a great deal of scrutiny . Most points given for accidents or violations remain on the driving record for three years . Racing and DUI convictions remain on the record for ten years . In California the distance you driver your Mercedes Benz each year is also a part of the computation . Services are available to insurance companies that track your mileage every time the vehicle is serviced . These services project you annual mileage and companies use bands of factors to develop the final premium . There are a few additional factors considered such as location where the car is being garaged , and occupation of the drivers in the household , Most automobile insurance is rated by a computer with little additional input from a live underwriter or agent . All of this information is used to compile a premium that the insurance company considers adequate for the risk . If approved by the computer , the agent is authorized to issue the policy and subject to potential additional review , the policy is in force .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Regulates Long Term Care Insurance ?
The State Departments of Insurance -LRB- DOI -RRB- regulate and oversee long-term care insurance sold and administered in each state . The General Accounting Office of the federal government -LRB- GAO -RRB- works in concert with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- to monitor the activities of the State DOI , and audit their work as it relates to payment of claims by individual insurance carriers , rate changes and approvals , and sales practices . In 2008 , the GAO released a report `` State Oversight of Rate Setting and Claims Settlement Practices '' involving 10 sample states on the topicand reported the following : `` Regulators in the 10 states GAO reviewed oversee claims settlement practices by monitoring consumer complaints and conducting examinations in an effort to ensure that companies are complying with standards . Claims settlement standards in these states largely focus on timely investigation and payment of claims and prompt communication with consumers , but the standards adopted and how states define timeliness vary notably across the states . Regulators told GAO that reviewing consumer complaints is one of the primary methods for monitoring companies compliance with state standards . In addition to monitoring complaints , these regulators also said that they use examinations of company practices to identify any violations in standards that may require further action . Finally , state regulators in 6 of the 10 states in GAOs review reported that their states are considering additional protections related to claims settlement . For example , regulators in several states said that their states were considering an independent review process for consumers appealing claims denials . Such an addition may be useful as some regulators said that they lack authority to resolve complaints where , for example , the company and consumer disagree on a factual matter , such as a consumers eligibility for benefits . '' Each state has a DOI website which includes a subsection on long-term care insurance sold in that state . Their Internet addresses are usually something like www.insurance . -LSB- abbreviation of state , like ` AZ ' -RSB- . gov.They can also be googled '' -LSB- Name of state -RSB- State Department of Insurance '' .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
Long-Term Care Insurance in Oregon is regulated by the Oregon Insurance Division , based in Salem , Oregon , the nation 's capitol . The state 's Insurance Division administers their Insurance Code to make sure that Long Term Care Insurance meets the standards they have set . This pamphlet is helpful for becoming acquainted with the regulations for Long Term Care Insurance in Oregon : WEBSITELINK
Variable Annuities are regulated by multiple agencies . First , the Department of Insurance of the State the Annuity was issued in regulates them to some extent . The states Securities Regulator also regulates them . FINRA & the SEC are two other regulators who have a hand in their regulations as well , depending on the agent who sold the policy .
The State Departments of Insurance -LRB- DOI -RRB- regulate and oversee long-term care insurance sold and administered in each state . The General Accounting Office of the federal government -LRB- GAO -RRB- works in concert with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- to monitor the activities of the State DOI , and audit their work as it relates to payment of claims by individual insurance carriers , rate changes and approvals , and sales practices . In 2008 , the GAO released a report `` State Oversight of Rate Setting and Claims Settlement Practices '' involving 10 sample states on the topicand reported the following : `` Regulators in the 10 states GAO reviewed oversee claims settlement practices by monitoring consumer complaints and conducting examinations in an effort to ensure that companies are complying with standards . Claims settlement standards in these states largely focus on timely investigation and payment of claims and prompt communication with consumers , but the standards adopted and how states define timeliness vary notably across the states . Regulators told GAO that reviewing consumer complaints is one of the primary methods for monitoring companies compliance with state standards . In addition to monitoring complaints , these regulators also said that they use examinations of company practices to identify any violations in standards that may require further action . Finally , state regulators in 6 of the 10 states in GAOs review reported that their states are considering additional protections related to claims settlement . For example , regulators in several states said that their states were considering an independent review process for consumers appealing claims denials . Such an addition may be useful as some regulators said that they lack authority to resolve complaints where , for example , the company and consumer disagree on a factual matter , such as a consumers eligibility for benefits . '' Each state has a DOI website which includes a subsection on long-term care insurance sold in that state . Their Internet addresses are usually something like www.insurance . -LSB- abbreviation of state , like ` AZ ' -RSB- . gov.They can also be googled '' -LSB- Name of state -RSB- State Department of Insurance '' .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Life insurance is regulated by state insurance departments . These agencies license or certify companies to sell life insurance in their state . And they do so according to their own standards . This means that not every company can sell their products in every state . It also means that not every product from every company would be approved by that state insurance department . Not only that : it means that certain sales procedures , such as the replacement of existing policies , follow different protocols . Your broker must work with his general agent and guide you through these state regulations . There is no federal agency regulating the life insurance industry , and I think that is a good thing . It simply is not needed . Excessive government regulation would only be cumbersome and costly . One reason why federal intervention is not needed is because the industry does a very good job of regulating itself . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners acts to promote industry - wide standards and best practices . The chief insurance regulators from all 50 states , the District of Columbia , and US territories all work together . They coordinate oversight of broker market conduct , consumer protection , and institutional viability . So you have kind of a state-based national system of insurance regulation . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Annuities are regulated by a few various entities , depending on the type of Annuity . All Annuities are regulated by the department of insurance in the state the annuity was sold . Variable Annuities , which participate directly in the stock market via managed funds , are regulated by other entities as well . Which one depends on the broker who sold you the Annuity . FINRA , State Securities Department , & the SEC all regulate registered reps/stock brokers/asset managers/etc .
No , because life insurance is legally different than long-term care insurance from a state regulation perspective . But ... many life companies are now offering in some states what 's known as `` living benefit riders '' which are a liberalization of the old `` accelerated death benefit '' riders . The new living benefit riders essentially permit a pre-death cash payout of some amount of the life insurance policy amount if you become what 's called `` chronically ill . This generally means unable to perform 2 of 6 daily activities of living . Bottom line ? Pre-death cash payouts from such riders can be used for long-term care , medical care or any purpose . We now recommend these riders to every life insurance applicant because they can provide a lifesaving injection of cash to a family in need and are an alternative to costly long-term care insurance . Best of all , they are free or cost only very little extra .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
Medical care has a price . In the open market it is fixed by consumers who want a service and medical personnel who can deliver the service . The problem occurs when someone needs the treatment but can not or will not pay the price for the service . I say , Will not because every decision about spending is discretionary . Should society as a whole bear the responsibility for the medical care for every resident ? Should the nature of that care be regulated ? Should the source of funding be general ? Those are the most pressing questions when considering a universal health care system . Ultimately in a universal health care system there is a specified list of services and a funding mechanism that is not based upon need for medical services . You may need a procedure that isnt covered in the program . At the same time you might consider another procedure immoral or frivolous . Who is going to decide ? The idea of universal health care sounds very good until you understand that some medical services will probably not be covered . In the USSR dental hygiene consisted of inserting a fluorescent tube into the patients mouth and surgery was routinely conducted in a super-cold environment because anesthesia was not readily available . In that case , most Americans would consider the health care to be inadequate . However , it was available to all and at little or no direct cost to the consumer . Under most regimes universal health care becomes rationed health care . The best example is the army under war time conditions . It is called triage but it means that you treat those with the greatest likelihood of recovery before treating soldiers with graver injuries . While it might be the best utilization of manpower , the soldier with his leg blown off , might not like the wait and a narcotic shot is not going to make his family happy . The issue of who is going to pay for the universal health care system is the most sensitive . No one wants to see others in need . By the same token no one wants to pay the high bill for medical treatment . If the universal care is funded by general funds from taxes it will always be a political football . If it is paid by premiums paid by individuals there will always be a need to assist those unable to pay the premium . The problem really boils down to our expectations of treatment level , the availability and cost of that treatment and who is going to pay the price . Yes , it sounds like a great idea but it has many difficulties and when it is expected then the society will start to question the need for universal flat screen TVs , micro-wave ovens and wall-to-wall carpets . There really isnt an end unless you look at the Soviet Union and see how it ended .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Tax-qualified long-term care insurance -LRB- TQ -RRB- pays out a benefit to qualifying insureds that is not taxable as ordinary income . Virtually all long-term care insurance policies sold today are TQ . But , some carriers still sell policies that are non-tax qualified -LRB- NTQ -RRB- because such a policy does not come under the same regulation as a TQ policy . The argument by some is that with an NTQ policy it is easier for the insured to qualify for the payment of long-term care costs . The language of the NTQ policy may also be more generous with regard to benefits , features , and riders . Whether those factors would be worth the possible taxation of the benefits is debatable .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Aflac Sell Auto Insurance ?
No , Aflac is a life & health carrier , offering supplemental policies , that pay you not the doctor or hospital . If you have an injury for example , Aflac would pay you for sickness or injury . Auto , home owners , liability , & commercial insurance , would be considered property & causality insurance . Think of it as P&C covers your property , & any liability for causality or risk you would incur .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Aflac sells in indemnity policies . Thesepolicy ` spay cash for qualifying event . Aflac is a great thing to have inadditionto your medical coverage but is notmeantto replace it .
Aflac life insurance is sold through American Family Life Assurance Company of Columbus and American Family Life Assurance Company of New York , with group policies sold through Continental American Insurance Company . Aflac and its companies were rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . They have been selling good term and permanent products since 1955 .
Aflac is not long term care insurance . Aflac stands for American Family Life Assurance of Columbus , and the company sells a number of types of policies to groups and individuals . They do not carry a specific long term care insurance policy , although a few of their policies cover conditions that can lead to the need for long term care .
American Family Life Assurance Company , or AFLAC , was rated A + by AM Best in May of 2013 . That is the second highest rating given by AM Best . While many of Aflac policies are group policies , they do sell Life Insurance in individual policies .
AFLAC is not traditional health insurance . They sell supplemtary insurance policies that cover specific events or conditions . Some of their policies cover accidents , critical illness , cancer and hospital confinement . The policies ususally run in the neighborhood of $ 20 to $ 40 dollars a month . As an illustration , the cancer policy provides a fixed dollar benefit if you are diagnosed with cancer such as $ 5,000 . If you have chemo you can a fixed dollar amount for eacy chemo treatmentlet 's say $ 350 . All AFLAC insurance policies pay you directly and not medical providers .
I will assume that your daughter is covered as a dependent under your AFLAC policy . AFLAC is not major medical health insurance , it is a supplement to major medical insurance designed to pay directly to the policyholder as opposed to a health care provider . AFLAC 's policies are designed to deal with specific types of situations such as a critical illness -LRB- which they spell out specifically what conditions qualify as a critical illness -RRB- , cancer , short term disability , hospital indemnity plans , accidents and life insurance . Other than the slight chance of a short term disability policy coming into play or some aspects of a hospital indemnity policy if your daughter was covered and met the contract terms for being hospitalized and/or disabled , I do not believe there will be circumstances where an AFLAC policy would pay out for a person diagnosed with Scoliosis .
What does AFLAC ' c Cancer policy pay ? I can only give you a general idea as each policy pays out different amounts , depending on the level of coverage you purchase . With that said , AFLACs Cancer policies usually pay for : Cancer tests such as Mammographies cervical screening colonoscopies , daily hospital benefit for room and board , some cancer drugs , cancer surgical benefits , anesthesiologist , daily doctor visits while you are in the hospital , blood , plasma , radiation therapy , chemotherapy , reconstruction after surgery , daily visits to the hospital by the patients doctor , benefits for travel to a cancer center including hotel , airfare , gas for your car to get there , ambulance benefits . These are some of the main coverages , but remember that there either annual or lifetime limits as to how much AFLAC will pay , it all depends on your policy .
No , Aflac does not offer a traditional Long Term Care Life Insurance product at this time . Aflac does carry a Critical Care and Recovery Insurance policy that would pay a cash benefit to the insured person if they were diagnosed with some serious , life impacting illnesses or health conditions as specified by the policy .
There are many well known insurance companies that sell disability insurance both short and long term . Perhaps you may know Metlife , Assurity , Principal Mutual , Guardian , Mass Mutual or Fidelity Insurance Group . Even the big reinsurer Lloyds of Loudon sell disability insurance . For short term disability plans there are a few most would recognize like AFLAC , Colonial and Combine .
Aflac does not sell Long Term Care Insurance , per se . However , American Family Life Assurance Company does carry a Critical Care and Recovery Insurance policy that would pay a benefit in case of stroke , paralysis , coronary artery bypass surgery , persistent vegetative state , major human organ transplant , or coma . They also cover policies for hospitalization and cancer . Therefore , there are some options despite the absence of a traditional long term care product .
No , Aflac is a life & health carrier , offering supplemental policies , that pay you not the doctor or hospital . If you have an injury for example , Aflac would pay you for sickness or injury . Auto , home owners , liability , & commercial insurance , would be considered property & causality insurance . Think of it as P&C covers your property , & any liability for causality or risk you would incur .
No . AFLAC is a supplementary insurance products insurance company that offers a variety of supplementary and voluntary insurance products . One of the products in their portfolio is a disability insurance product . But , AFLAC offers other lines of coverage such as accident policies , cancer policies , critical illness policies and life insurance policies .
I know of highly rated companies that sell Cancer Plans . I am a New York Agent so I deal with top companies . Aflac is one company , and along with a employee group plan it is added at a low dollar amount . Mutual of Omaha is another company that is very unique in Cancer and Critical Illness plans . They pay a lump sum as with American General . I am always good at finding the best policy that fits .
Unfortunately , you are not able to purchase Aflac short term disability insurance as an individual . To buy Aflac 's short term disability coverage requires that you are employed by a business that offers it , and then it is paid for by payroll deduction . You would need to contact the business you work for to get the rates for this insurance .
No Aflac specializes in indemnity policies . These pay the policy holder a specified sum upon a qualifying event . I frequently will include Aflac 's policies in a group health planproposal they do serve a very valuable function just as a stand alone policy . However they areextremelyeffective in helping to manage costs while delivering high quality health plans .
AFLAC disability insurance is really no different than any other company 's disability policy when it comes to the rules of taxation . If you paid your premiums with your post tax or after tax dollars then your disability benefits should not be taxed . If your employer pays your premiums and writes them off on the company taxes , then the disability benefits would be taxed as ordinary income and you will receive a 1099 from the insurance company or AFLAC in this case .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Happens When Your Term Life Insurance Expires ?
If you have a term life insurance policy and the guarantee period on it is expiring , you have a several options : 1 -RRB- you can continue to pay premiums as the policy will be annually renewable , however , the premiums will start to go up each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- by a substantial margin . 2 -RRB- If the conversion period is still available , you can convert all , or a portion , of the face amount to a permanent policy with new medical underwriting . 3 -RRB- you can stop paying premiums and let the policy lapse , thus ending your coverage . 4 -RRB- you can apply for a new policy -LRB- can be with the same carrier or a new carrier -RRB- to secure a new term or permanent insurance policy . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
OK . So you bought that term insurance to save money . It was certainly cheaper to start than that whole life you were offered . But now the term has expired . Most companies will allow you to keep your term policy past the expressly stated number of years , but no longer with that fixed premium . The premium will escalate and escalate quickly , kind of like sky rocketing . What to do ? Well you could try to get yet another term policy , for another ten or twenty or so years . But if you are no long longer insurable , you are out of luck . That is why whole life would have been a better choice in the long run . Or , if you are lucky , and are still insurable , you can go for either another term policy , or jump to a whole life policy . Remember , premiums on term , even in good health , will only get higher each time you get another policy . If you can , you may want now to jump to that whole life policy you could have gotten for a lot less years earlier . Thank you . GARY LANE .
When your term life insurance policy expires , either it just ends , or it can be continued with extremely high rates , and the rates can then go up every year . In essence , the only way most people would keep the policy going at the new annually renewable rates would be if they are seriously ill and can not get another policy that would pay an immediate death benefit . That 's why it is best to have a fund for permanent needs on the side , if you take out a Term policy . Term life insurance is meant for temporary needs , because you never know if you can qualify for a new policy when the term ends .
What happens when you Life Insurance policy expires depends on the type of policy and the event . If the policy expires because it is reached the end of contract and there is no option for renewal , the policy end . For example term policies usually expire at a specified age . You usually have an option to convert to a permanent policy sometime before the expiry date . If you mean by expiring going out of force because of non-payment you , if you are healthy you can often reinstate the policy by payment of back premiums . Some policies have a cash value that is paid when the policy expires or matures . The policy wording would specify . If you have any questions , or feel that I could be of asssitance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
All life insurance expires it is just a matter of when . Term life insurance is purchased by the expiration date . Term can be purchased by level premiums for 5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . Technically term life insurance will not expire on that date but the premiums will increase drastically in most cases ten fold and expire around age 80 or 85 . On permanent life insurance or cash value life insurance , the expiration is determined by the level of premium . On a whole life or universal life you have different levels of premium known as minimum , target and maximum . The target premium can be set for a certain age . Most common is age 95 or age 100 . There are several companies that will allow the target to be adjusted to an age range of 105 to 150 years old . Which it would be a miracle to live past age 150 , but if one did , the policy would expire .
When your term life insurance expires , you may have the option to keep paying the premium to keep it in effect . But the price will be much higher than you were paying , and go up every year . Most people look for a new policy when their old term life insurance expires . The rate will most likely be higher than you paid before , because you are older . Your health will also be taken into account . Since you will be paying more , anyway , you may just want to bite the bullet and get at least some permanent insurance . The older you get , the harder it is to qualify for term . But if you want to get a new term policy and can qualify for it , that is what many people do . If you know that your term policy 's expiration date is coming up , you might want to look into converting some or all of your coverage to permanent life insurance -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . This just involves paperwork , no health questions and no exam . But it must be done before your policy expires and according to the conversion period set forth in your term policy .
Term life insurance policies do eventually expire . Some expire at the end of the term . Some become annually renewable term policies at the end of the term , then expire some years after that . Whether or not your term policy expires , the price usually becomes unaffordable at the end of the term you originally took out . It is better to convert your policy to permanent insurance before your term ends , if you have that option . With many term policies , converting them to permanent will allow you to lock in a premium for the rest of your life .
Yes term insurance ends at a certain age as stated in the policy contract . The age that term policies expire has risen over the years . I have observed over that the age most term insurance policies expire is a couple of years before projected life expectancy . For example when life expectancy was 67 , policies expired at 65 , 76 then 75 , Now most expire at age 85 . Term policies do contain a conversion to permanent insurance before a specified date . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
If you have Term life insurance , the policy will expire when the term ends . So if you have 20 year term , the policy will expire at the end of year 20 . Either that , or it will jump up to a price that is unaffordable for most people . If Whole Life for which premiums have been paid on time and , if there there loans , the loans have been repaid with interest , the policy will not expire . It may endow , which means the cash value equals the face amount , allowing you to take the proceeds while alive . But it will not expire . Universal Life that has a no lapse guarantee is similar to Whole Life . Most Universal Life policies have a shorter guaranteed period after which they might expire . Usually , they last much longer per current interest rates . You would have to order a current illustration to find out how much time is left on your UL at both current and guaranteed interest rates .
When a life insurance term expires , a few things can happen , depending on the features of your term policy . Sometimes , the policy will simply end , and you must get new one if you want to have continued coverage . Sometimes , the policy can be extended at a higher price or lower face amount . You will know this when you take the policy out . Another thing that might happen is that the policy is changed from a level term to an annually renewable rate . This rate is much higher than your original premium and goes up every year .
Term life insurance policies technically do n't expire until age 90 or 95 -LRB- with most carriers -RRB- . However , most people only keep a term life insurance policy until the term premium guarantee period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 20 year term policy , you 're likely only going to carry it until the end of that 20 year period -RRB- . When the term premium guarantee period expires , the policy structure will do one of two things : 1 -RRB- the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- by substantial margins , or 2 -RRB- the premiums will remain the same and the death benefit will decrease each year . Many people often review their term insurance policies well before the term period expires because they may want to replace the policy with a new one to create a new term period to secure low rates while they 're young and healthy or change the amount of coverage they need to reduce their premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your term insurance coverage , including quotes and policy analysis and comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
When Term Life Insurance expires there may be a couple of choices . With some Term life insurance , the policy just ends . If you want a new policy you would have to apply for a new one . With other Term life insurance policies , you have the option to pay a new , much higher premium . This premium is usually annually renewable and can go up every year . Rather than let the policy expire and have to pay that premium , it would be a better idea to convert the Term policy to a Permanent policy , if that option exists . But converting Term to Permanent must occur before the Term policy expires , sometimes years prior to that time . Review your Term policy 's features to see when the conversion period ends .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Yes , a life insurance policy can expire . Some Term policies will expire at the end of the term , while others will go into years of annually renewable term -LRB- meaning the premium can go up every year -RRB- before the policy expires . Permanent insurance will not expire if it is set up to last until death at any age , and if all policy payments are on time with no unpaid loans . Some permanent life insurance policies are set up to expire at a certain time .
There is no such thing as best life insurance to buy . It all depends on your need and your stage in life . If you are in your 20s and 30s then a whole life policy may be appropriate since it tends to be more affordable in this state of your life . In your 40s and 50s a 30 year term may make much sense when a retirement investment is also created to parallel to term life so that if the policy expires in your 70s or 80s , your retirement savings will take care of burial cost in the invent of death . Remember always contact your financial advisor before you act . One thing to remember about whole life is that your premium goes to two places : Insurance and investment . Lets say you are paying $ 160 per month for whole life policy . $ 100 may go towards your insurance and $ 60 may into an investment account that yields some interest . Let say you purchased a face amount $ 500,000 and you were aged 30 when you bought it . Forty years latter at age 70 your saving has generated about $ 400,000 . If you die , your beneficiary will receive the insurance face amount of $ 500,000 but not the $ 400,000 in saving/investment account , That amount remains with the insurance company . You can withdraw your $ 400,000 as a loan while you are alive and has to paid back to the insurance company . If it is not paid then your insurance face amount will be reduced by loan balance upon your death . In short your beneficiary will receive $ 100,000 upon your death . Term life insures you only for a fix number of years usually 10,20 or 30 and policy expires or renews at a much higher rate You may also become un insurable at policy expiration . Remember to talk to your financial adviser
Generally , when people ask about their life insurance expiring , they are referring to Term insurance . When the term of 10 , 15 , 20 , etc years is up , your policy may end , or you may choose to continue it at a much higher premium . Most people get a new Term policy when their current one expires . Sometimes Universal Life policies expire . Rather than having to start over , you can dump money into a UL to make it last longer . This does take a substantial amount of cash ; however , you can also reduce the face amount , as long as you are not already at the minimum face amount .
As mentioned above , a 5 year term insurance is an insurance policy that is in force for 5 years then expires . It is designed for a short term need and or specifically for the purpose of converting to a Whole Life policy within that 5 year period . Most Term policies are `` convertible '' to permanent insurance and some companies limit the type of permanent insurance their term policies may be converted to . In `` converting '' a term to a permanent policy what happens is the face amount of the Term , or a portion of that amount is converted to a Whole Life or Universal life policy without the insured having to undergo additional medical testing or underwriting . The premiums paid to the Term policy are not credited to the new permanent policy and the new premium will be based on the current age of the insured .
The answer depends on what you bought . Term is bought for a specific number of years , unlike whole life , which is for your lifetime . So long as you pay the premium , term will not expire until you reach the end of the period you bought it for . For example , ten year term expires ten years after you buy it , so long as you pay the premiums . If you do not replace term before it expires , either with more term , or with whole life , you will be left with no life insurance . Thank you . GARY LANE
If you have a term life insurance that is set to expire soon , run , do n't walk , to find out your options before it expires . You can ask your current agent , call the life insurance company , or pick out an agent you feel you can trust and ask them to compile your options for you . If your health has gotten worse since you took out your term policy , you may not have the option to buy as much coverage as you would like , in a new policy . Converting your term policy to Universal or Whole Life allows you to keep the same amount of coverage and even be rated the same as you were before , without having to answer a single health question . Many term policies are convertible to the end of the term or to a certain age , whichever comes first . Some are only convertible for part of the term . If conversion is not an option , you must either pay the new higher premium , or purchase a new policy when your current term coverage expires .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is There A Limit To How Much Life Insurance You Can Buy ?
The purchase of life insurance is predicated on financial justification to come up with a death benefit . If the justification amount can be certified the death benefit , the numbers can become quite large , over $ 100,000,000 . Many large insurance companies offer jumbo limits to 65 million . You can also justify life insurance coverage with the expected earnings -LRB- human value -RRB- for an individual to age 65 and use a multiplier to increase the death benefit amount .
There is a limit to how much life insurance you can buy , and the way it is determined is called financial underwriting . At each age , the insurance company will set a maximum amount of coverage that can be purchased at each income level . E.g. . At age 30 they might allow 25 times the annual salary . If your salary is $ 60,000 per year , you can get $ 1,500,000 . However , underwriters also consider assets and liabilities , as well as other income in the household . So it can be possible to get far more coverage than the income formula allows .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There 's generally a limit to how much life insurance you can have . With most insurance companies , this limit is 20x your income - some companies may view a limit of 25x income or 30x income . Even if you do not have your entire coverage with one carrier , these limits will still apply - on every application , the carrier will ask you about existing or pending coverage and want to know the total amounts you have or are looking to place in force . Keep in mind , there has to be an insurable interest and a need to buy the coverage -LRB- e.g. income replacement , estate planning purposes , family protection , etc. -RRB- . The average person does n't have enough coverage to cover every financial need - generally due to their ability to write the check for the amount needed to cover every need and/or not understanding how much coverage would be necessary to cover all of the financial needs -RRB- . A life insurance needs analysis is a great way to determine how much coverage you would need to cover all financial burdens in the event of your death - as many may not want to buy the resulting amount , you can break the figures down and determine which needs are the most important to protect . Your best bet is to work with an independent life insurance agent/broker than can go through the needs analysis process with you and compare multiple options to find the program that will best serve your needs .
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
Sure . Financial institutions always set limits on the money they make available . For example , banks limit how much money they will lend you for a mortgage or business loan . Credit card companies limit the amount of credit they will extend you . Venture-capital firms limit the amount of money they will invest in your company . Life insurance companies generally look at your cash flow , debt , and net worth . Pretty basic stuff . Things get exciting when you have exceptional needs . For example , how much money insurance will they let you buy on a minor child ? Or an elder parent ? Or a former spouse ? Certainly , there are limits in all these situations . But the negotiations about the maximum available becomes interesting .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Yes . You can buy life insurance on your parents when several factors are met : 1 -RRB- They agree to allow you to take out a life insurance policy on their lives . 2 -RRB- There is an insurable interest for the coverage -LRB- buying coverage on a family member is a common purchasing scenario -RRB- . 3 -RRB- The policy being applied for is suitable to the need - there are limits to how much coverage can be taken out a person -LRB- generally 20-30x income - exact maximum coverage allowance varies by carrier -RRB- . After discussing the prospect of buying the insurance with your parents , you will want to talk to an experienced life insurance broker who can go through everything with you , evaluate how much coverage is appropriate for what you 're trying to accomplish , review the medical histories of them -LRB- this is critical especially with older individuals because it affects the risk classification they qualify for -RRB- , provide the proper and most accurate quotes for the coverage , and get the coverage placed in force . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
At first I understood the question as Peggy did , then I saw Bob 's answer ... So I 'll address both concepts . Life insurance FOR children is a great idea and a great GIFT ! That is WHole Life - not Term . You can start a policy on a baby for $ 50,000 very inexpensively and by the time they are adult , the policy could well have doubled in face value and grown several thousands of dollars in cash value . That cash could be used for college , to buy a car , etc. . Then the policy could be turned over to the now adult child to continue as protection for their future family , etc. . The amount of Life insurance needed for yourself when you have children has many variables to consider when determining how much is enough . I always recommend to buy as much as you can afford . Again , Whole Life . There are tax advantages , cash value and other benefits that only come with Whole Life . If you also have a spouse in addition to the children you 'll want to consider how much it would take to replace your income . Is there a mortgage ? Do you want to pay for college for your kids ? These things and more should be considered when determining how much is needed . You 're best bet is to consult with an experienced Insurance Adviser to figure out what your needs are , and then to help you find the best company and policy to meet those needs .
The first step in buying life insurance is to determine how much coverage you need , what type of insurance will work best for your needs , and how much it will cost . With life insurance you can not just pick out the policy with the features that you like . You must qualify medically , and your overall mortality risk -LRB- or lack thereof -RRB- determines your rate . What company you use and the type of policy you choose also figure into the premium you will pay . So the best way to buy life insurance is to talk to an agent who can help you determine how much you need , explain what types of policies work best for that need , and then shop around to find the best rate for which you qualify . Good life insurance agencies stick with you and guide you through to the time when the policy you want is in your safe , ready to go into action if tragedy strikes . While a life insurance agent is the last person most people wish to consult , in the end , most policies require an agent as the middle person , anyway . Starting out by calling an honest agent can make the process very simple and help you save hundreds of dollars .
If you are considering term insurance please ask yourself these questions . How old am I ? If I buy 20 year term now how old will I be when I have to buy another policy ? Does it meet your needs to buy term life considering the objective of the policy ? The purpose of term has always been to allow the purchaser to invest the difference between the cost of term life and permanent coverage . How much are you `` investing '' now ? Every policy you have means you are paying `` administrative costs '' for that policy . What if you have one good size permanent policy purchased at your current age to meet all your life insurance needs or can you buy a term life and then be able to meet your financial objectives and not have to buy another life insurance policy ? Finally , you need to have a personal advisor that puts your needs first and has the integrity to make recommendations based on your TOTAL financial plan and not some life insurance agent pedaling life insurance
Yes . You can buy life insurance on your brother if several factors are met : 1 -RRB- He agrees to allow you to take out a life insurance policy on his life -LRB- evidenced by him signing the paperwork as the proposed insured -RRB- . 2 -RRB- There is an insurable interest for the coverage . 3 -RRB- The policy being applied for is suitable to the need - there are limits to how much coverage can be taken out a person -LRB- generally 20-30x income - exact maximum coverage allowance varies by carrier -RRB- . After discussing the prospect of buying the insurance with your brother , you will want to talk to an experienced life insurance broker who can go through everything with you , help you evaluate how much coverage is appropriate for what you 're trying to accomplish , review your brother 's medical history -LRB- this is very very important because the medical history determines the risk classification he qualifies for - the risk classification determines the premiums you will have to pay for the coverage -RRB- , provide the proper and most accurate quotes for the coverage , and get the coverage placed in force . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
-- > Normal 0 You may first want to ask yourself the question , why am I buying homeowners insurance in the first place ? The most common answer is , should my home be damaged or destroyed , Id like to have enough money to fix or replace it . So that is a good place to start . How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? Its not an easy number to come up with but there are free tools available on the Internet to assist you with this effort -LRB- Google-Residential Replacement Cost Calculators -RRB- . Insurance companies normally do their own replacement cost estimates and will suggest or require certain minimum limits for specific types of coverage . Your lender , if you have one , may also have coverage requirements so your ultimate decision will be a combination of these factors . Just remember , you are the one buying the coverage and paying the premium . Make sure your needs and expectations are considered . The actual cost to rebuild your home will vary depending on local conditions following your loss . Hurricanes , tornadoes , wild fires and the like cause devastation to entire areas . Contractors , labor and materials may not be available at normal costs . Many insurance companies offer policies , which base the amount of insurance on normal building costs , but automatically increase the limit to whatever you need to rebuild your home should costs change dramatically following your claim . This feature is commonly referred to as Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost , make sure to consider this feature if it is available . Separate additional amounts of insurance will be included for your personal property , other non-business structures on your property and additional living expense . These limits are functions of the amount you carry on your home , normally they are more than adequate but make sure you are comfortable with them as they can be increased if necessary . The other major part of the policy will be your personal liability limit . That limit should be consistent with the liability limits you carry on your auto -LRB- s -RRB- and not less than $ 300,000 . If your net worth exceeds $ 300,000 , you may wish to consider Personal Umbrella coverage . Personal umbrellas are considered a less expensive way to purchase high liability limits . In addition , they usually provide broader coverage and do not have as many exclusions or limitations as basic liability policies .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
Why Is Critical Illness Insurance Important ?
Critical illness is a broad form of cancer insurance . A good major medical plan will cover the lions share of your medical bills but there are always deductibles , copay 's and coinsurance left over to be paid out of your pocket . A good critical illness insurance plan can help you pay these bills and a lot more .
Statistics show that a great percentage will contract any of the covered illnesses and that in the many that have had these illnesses was left with no financial resources to help treat the illnesses ; therefore , not able to work , pay the bills at home , and money for treatments . Depending on carrier and type of policy payments are lump sum and tax free from 20,000 to 1,000,000 . Converage is for Heart Attack , Cancer , Stroke , and Renal Failure .
Critical Illness Insurance is important if you have a high risk of getting a serous illness due to having it run in your family , and if you do not have savings to carry you through the time of treatment and recovery . Receiving a lump sum of money via a critical illness policy can make a big difference in your recovery as you have the extra funds to spend on time to heal , try new treatments , etc.
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
Critical Illness insurance is a specified disease based coverage meant to provide a tax free , lump sum face amount up diagnosis of a covered illness.There are several insurance carriers who offer this coverage and as you can imagine , each carrier covers different conditions . That said , there are a select few States where the Department of Insurance has not approved Critical Illness insurance for sale within that specific State . Anyway , of all the conditions covered ... the most important are Heart Attack , Cancer and Stroke . Not to downplay the seriousness of other diagnosed conditions but nearly 80 % of all claims that will get paid from these policies are due to those three conditions . Each carrier offers coverage for other conditions . Some carriers offer coverage for 21 different conditions , while other carriers may limit their coverage to 4 or 5 conditions . Please understand that when looking into Critical Illness coverage , the most important thing to look for is not just what conditions are covered but how they are covered . The benefit definitions are a major consideration and it is `` critical '' -LRB- pardon the pun -RRB- to know the benefit definitions prior to purchase . There are carriers who provide a stroke benefit but will not pay a benefit unless the neurological deficit of the stroke persists for 30 days ... whereas there area few carriers who will pay a stroke benefit once the neurological deficit persists 96 hours . I hope this helped answer your question .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
If your family has a predisposition to chronic illness or specific disease , you may want to consider critical illness insurance to supplement your medical coverage . It 's also important to address critical illness offered in medical group plans because the price can be cheaper that individual critical illness insurance coverage .
The carrier with the best benefits at the lowest rate offers the best critical illness coverage in AZ. . This is precisely why it 's important to work with a seasoned broker or agency that has the expertise and knowledge to sort through multiple carriers to figure who really offers the best . Do n't be fooled by a strong marketing campaign or a funny duck commercial and believe that is the best for you . You 've already gotten past the toughest part ... realizing the value in a supplemental critical illness policy . Next , I would ask for a referral to an experienced broker . James | 561-320-2978 or email me at : jelbaum@clminsure.com
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
Life insurance pays your beneficiary if you die . Critical illness insurance pays you if you have a need for extended care due to a sickness . And some life insurance policies offer critical illness riders that cover both . Its important to weigh the difference in benefit language with a standalone critical illness policy or a rider with a life insurance policy .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
Reputable insurance companies pay legitimate claims on critical illness . Its an important part of your medical coverage , especially if your family has a predisposition to disease and chronic hospitalization . When youre young and healthy , critical illness is affordable . If you have this type of family health history , you should investigate critical illness insurance .
Generally , critical illness insurance is not a taxable benefit . The money that is used to purchase critical illness insurance has already been taxed , since critical illness insurance is not tax exempt as a medical expense . Thus , the benefits paid if the critical illness policy pays out , are not taxable .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
Accident and Critical illness insurance are similar in structure , but cover different things . Both policies will typically pay out a lump sum or up the benefit amount directly to the insured or a provider of their choice . The difference however is that accident plans only cover medical expenses associated with an accident where as critical illness insurance pays lump sum upon diagnosis of a major critical illness . Make sure to read the list of covered critical illness ' in the policy before purchasing .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How To Use Disability Insurance ?
If your employer offers short term disability you can bring your exposure down to 30 days very cost effectively . By ensuring that you have no more than 30 days exposure you can protect your savings account from the necessity of having to use it to pay for short term disability plans . While your `` occupation '' classification determines if you can get a long term disability plan beyond 5 years the protection of being disabled should never be overlooked . If you look at the percertage possiblity of your being disabled is higher than your death . What is the importance of having an `` own occupation '' definition vs. `` any occupation '' definition ?
Individuals as ell as business use disability insurance to protect the paycheck of the policy insured against prolonged illness and/or injury . Most working Americans have around 90 days in cash reserves , so you may want to use 90 day elimination period . You can also purchase short and/or long term disability insurance .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
You may have group disability insurance available to you through your employer , however , you will find generally find stronger coverage through an individual disability insurance plan . A disability is a sickness or injury which interferes in your ability to work and earn a living . In disability insurance , there 's 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST IMPORTANT factor to look at in a policy . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True own occupation is the best definition you can have . Gainful occupation is commonly seen in group policies and offers the least coverage . One of the drawbacks of group coverage is if your employment is terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual policy goes with you wherever you go and generally features stronger coverage and a better definition of disability -LRB- a true own occupation or modified own occupation definition -RRB- . You want to buy your disability insurance when you 're healthy - this type of coverage is much more in depth than life and health insurance . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may face an exclusion rider for the condition under a given policy or be postponed for the coverage until it 's resolved . Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance that has moving parts to policies . If you 're looking to apply for coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and have experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish and make the process as seemless as possible . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How to choose disability insurance ? Well , first thing you check before rates and dollars paid out is the `` definition '' of disability . This is the only thing that matters as if you do not meet the definition of disability the policy will not pay out . The next is how long does the duration of the definition of disability last ? Is it different durations for different disabilities ? A policy is only as good as the definitions it pays from . Words are so very important with disability insurance . Unlike life insurance where death pretty much determines the payout , disability has to meet a definition within the policy to be paid out .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To buy Disability Insurance online , go to a website that sells Disability Insurance and request a quote . It is very difficult to obtain an instant DI -LRB- Disability Insurance -RRB- quote because there are so many variables to DI policies . So using an online Contact Us form or emailing the website email address might work best . Keep in mind that many online websites that only give instant quotes for Life Insurance , also offer Disability Insurance quotes from a number of DI carriers -LRB- as our website does -RRB- . That is because licensed Life agents can also sell DI , and many of the same companies that offer good Life insurance policies also offer good Disability Insurance policies . Again , calling or emailing the website is your best way to determine where and how to purchase Disability Insurance online .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Disability Insurance protects your income during times of being disabled . Short Term Disability covers injuries and illnesses with a fairly short recovery time , normally a few months . Long Term Disability covers longer periods of disability , up to retirement age . How long the policy pays , and whether it only pays for full disability or also when unable to work full time , depends on features chosen in the policy . You can also pick how much of your paycheck you want to replace , up to a limit .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Borrow Against Globe Life Insurance ?
Borrowing against a life insurance policy requires cash value inside that policy . Term life insurance does n't have cash value , but whole life insurance policies may . So , you would need to have a whole life policy with Global Life Insurance in order to be able to borrow against it . Call up your company and ask if you have any cash value inside your policy and what the borrowing options and costs are .
In a word - No . Globe life insurance is Term insurance , which has no cash value . Since it has no cash value there is nothing to borrow against . Only with ` Permanent ' types of insurance such as Whole Life and the various Universal Life policies is there value associated against which one may borrow . And I always caution people about `` Universal '' life policies , because they can and often do run out of cash value and even expire before the owner is aware of what happened . Whole Life is the only truly permanent life insurance and the premiums never increase . And you know in advance what the guaranteed cash value will be at any future date . And the cash value may be much more than the guaranteed value .
As long as your Globe Life insurance policy has accrued a cash value and there are not any outstanding loans against that balance then you can borrow against it . Loans on a permanent life insurance policy are meant to be paid back -LRB- in most scenarios -RRB- . To maximize the life insurance products be careful and advise a financial advisor or agent prior to borrowing against the cash value in your policy .
Per their website , you can borrow money from a Globe Life Insurance policy . The policy must be Whole Life that you have had long enough to build up a cash value . You can take out a policy loan to borrow against the cash value that has built up in your Globe Whole Life policy .
In a word - No . Globe life insurance is Term insurance , which has no cash value . Since it has no cash value there is nothing to borrow against . Only with ` Permanent ' types of insurance such as Whole Life and the various Universal Life policies is there value associated against which one may borrow . And I always caution people about `` Universal '' life policies , because they can and often do run out of cash value and even expire before the owner is aware of what happened . Whole Life is the only truly permanent life insurance and the premiums never increase . And you know in advance what the guaranteed cash value will be at any future date . And the cash value may be much more than the guaranteed value .
Globe life insurance markets term life insurance , whole life insurance , accidental death insurance , mortgage protection plans , and medicare supplements . Two versions of the whole life policies do build up cash value that you can borrow against . The Children 's whole life policy is called `` The Young American Plan '' and there is a Whole Life policy that adults can purchase . The face amounts of Globe policies are pretty low so if you are looking for policies to accumulate cash , there are better options available .
As Peggy stated above , if your Globe policy is a whole life policy and has grown some cash value the you should be able to borrow against it . However I would advise you to first find out what the interest rate is and if Globe uses `` direct recognition '' regarding policy loans . Because Globe is a stock company therefore the policy holders do not enjoy the sharing of dividends as with a mutual company . So you may be better off taking a loan from a bank if you ca get a low interest loan . For more on how `` Direct Recognition '' affects a policy loan and why it is imperative that you know their policy before taking a loan , please see the article here : WEBSITELINK
That is a great question ! The only things that you need to have in order to borrow from your Globe Life -LRB- or any company 's life insurance policy -RRB- are these : First , that you are the owner of the policy . If Your parents bought it for you when you were young , and they are still the owners , you will not be able to borrow from it . They can , but you ca n't . You must be the owner of the policy . Second , it must be a whole life policy , as term policies have no cash value ; And third , that there is an adequate cash reserve to borrow from . If the policy is fairly new , there may not be much to borrow from , or if there has already been a loan taken , you may not be able to take more cash out , without tanking the policy . My advice would be to contact your agent , or Globe themselves , -LRB- have your policy number handy -RRB- and ask them if you are good to borrow . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
If your Globe Life Insurance policy is Whole Life , as many are , you should be able to borrow money from it . You will need to wait until you have paid in long enough to have money built up in the policy to borrow from . Calling Globe and asking for a current illustration should be able to show you how much there is for you to borrow .
I could not find any indication that Globe Life is associated with CMFG , but called Globe Life to confirm . Their representative said that if your policy is with Globe Life , your statement should say Globe Life . It may be that you have a policy with `` globe '' in the product title , or got your policy through Global Credit Union ?
That is a great question ! Globe Life is a subsidiary of Torchmark , A Fortune 500 financial services company . they were originally Liberty National Insurance company until 1980 when they acquired Globe Life , and formed the torchmark holding company . My best guess would be that they have a portion of that company that handles their banking , that most likely goes through CUNA , -LRB- Credit Union National Association -RRB- , the marketing group for your mysterious CMFG -LRB- CUNA became CMFG in 2012 -RRB- . Or CMFG bought a part of Globe 's life business , which is a fairly common practice - The big financial companies buy/sell blocks of mortgages and other investments that may include life insurance policies in order to earn more money themselves . It may be that the CMFG people -LRB- who sell services to credit unions and consumers -RRB- bought a chunk of Globes business , with yours in it . I 'd call Globe , or drop them an email to their customer service people and ask them why , and make sure you know who owns your policy , so you know who to contact/collect from . It can be very confusing when high finance starts swapping assets , and we little folk try to keep track ... I had a mortgage that was sold 4 times that I know of ! Good luck , I would n't worry too much , just be sure . Thanks for asking !
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company was rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . This company , like every life insurance company , has their niche . Globe Life 's niche is doing policies online and through the mail . While handy , they do not allow people to get as much life insurance as they might want , and going through medical underwriting can save many people money vs buying No Exam coverage online . Whether Globe Life Insurance is good for you depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay .
Per Globe Life 's website , Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Touchmark Corporation , which is a holding company that specializes in life and supplemental health insurance , and has its main office in McKinney , TX . Globe Life 's home office is located in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma .
If you have a Globe Whole Life insurance policy that has accumulated cash value beyond any surrender charges or outstanding loans , you will most likely be able to cash it in . Call Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company at 972-540-6542 with your policy number to talk to a representative and see if you are able to cash in your Globe Life insurance policy .
The price of Globe Life Insurance depends on the type of policy you purchase , your age , gender , and other factors . So it is impossible to state a dollar amount for Globe Life Insurance . While the company offers some good rates , their choices for coverage are not too extensive . So you may want to contact Globe to see what rate you can get , then compare it with other companies using the quote engines provided on many websites .
Globe Life Insurance , well known for its $ 1 advertisement for the first month 's premium , is an A + rated carrier . As such , they are financially strong . My issue with Globe is in the small print . The level premium increases every 5 years making it virtually impossible for the insured 's to keep a policy at older ages . Most everyone I speak with about Globe was unaware of this important feature . Buyer beware !
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
if you have a whole life policy , and not a term life policy , and You have built the required cash value then of course you may borrow from the cash value . Although I am not a partner with Globe in particular I can inform you of the in general as for all Whole Life Insurance policies are designed .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Subject To Federal Income Tax ?
Is life insurance subject to income taxes ? Usually , the answer is no . The proceeds of the death benefit are usually considered to be income tax free to the beneficiary because the policy owner had already paid taxes on the premium . Where the taxation would change would be where a tax deduction was taken on the premium .
In most cases the death benefit of a life insurance policy is not taxable as income . The only exception would be that if the type of policy seems to the IRS to be an investment in disguise . This is very rare . This is what makes life insurance an attractive way to save for final expenses .
Is life insurance federally taxable ? Depends . Life insurance usually is not subject federal income taxes as long as it is used and funded in the standard way . Life insurance cash values can be subject to income taxes if over funded creating a modified endowment contract . Some life premiums can be set up pre tax that create a taxable death benefit . There is a possibility of state and federal estate taxes depending on the size of the estate and ownership of the policy .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
There are several federal tax benefits to owning life insurance . The most obvious is that the death benefit passes to the policy beneficiary income tax free . This doesnt just apply to individuals but can apply to a business , a trust , or an estate as well . When the insurance is owned by a third party or an irrevocable trust it will may also bypass estate taxes . When an owner needs to withdraw money from a policy by surrendering the policy the money that is withdrawn receives favorable tax treatment and only that portion that is in excess to the premiums paid becomes taxable . You can take out federal income tax-free loans from a permanent life insurance policy . The loans may reduce the death benefit and are limited by the cash value of the policy . When loans are taken the proceeds are not subject to the 3.8 % passive income tax rule of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- These loans will not affect income taxes on your social security benefits and they do not affect the FAFSA application for student funding . Increasingly policies have provisions that allow the owner to withdraw funds to pay for certain long term care expenses . This is usually free of federal income tax . Discuss this more closely with your insurance agent as different company designs will result in varying taxation . There are tax free transfers available to holders of permanent insurance policies that allow growth in excess of premiums paid to be transferred to other insurance and annuity contracts without incurring a current tax obligation . Of course , death eliminates all taxes on deferred growth .
The health insurance premium tax credit is a creation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and first became available January 1 , 2014 . In general , individuals and families whose income falls between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level will qualify for some level of subsidy for health insurance that they purchase through the Federal or state health insurance marketplaces in the person 's state of residence . The amount of premium credit a person qualifies for is based upon a sliding scale that is highest at the low end of the Federal Poverty Level and declines to almost nothing as a person gets to the 400 % level . A person can only receive this premium tax credit for health insurance plans they purchase through the government health insurance marketplace . You do have a choice when you learn that you qualify for a premium tax credit . You can choose to receive it in the form of an `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' or you can wait until you do your annual taxes and capture it at that time . With the `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' choice your credit amount will be sent to the insurance carrier you select each month to pay a portion of your monthly premium and you will be balance billed for the rest . If you opt to pay for your health insurance in full and then claim your credit on your income taxes the amount of the credit you qualified for would be included in any income tax refund you receive . This might be a very important choice . Your premium subsidy will be based upon what you estimate your income will be in the coming year . If you guess wrong and receive a higher subsidy than it turns out you actually qualified for based on the income you report on your income tax form for that year then the overpayment can be withheld from any income tax refund you might have had coming . Conversely , if you made less than you had projected you would find your possible income tax refund increased by the remaining subsidy amount you would have qualified for . While the premium tax subsidies do provide a mechanism to assist persons in certain income levels to purchase health insurance they might not have otherwise been able to afford , it will also complicate the income tax filing process for many of these people .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Variable Annuities are taxed just the same as a traditional Fixed Annuity . If the Annuity is not in an IRA or other Qualified Plan , then any withdrawal is subject to capitol gains tax , both Federal and State . This is just on the `` Gains '' of the policy . If the Annuity is in an IRA or Qualified Retirement Plan , then withdrawals are taxed as Income . It is also important to note that any withdrawal before age 591/2 , is subject to a 10 % tax penalty . This is for IRA & non IRA Annuities . If the Annuity is a Variable Immediate Annuity , which pays an income stream to you , then things are a bit different . If it is an IRA then all income payments are taxed as Income . If it is not an IRA , then it is taxed under the exclusion ration . This `` excludes '' a certain percentage of the income from taxes , since it is considered basis -LRB- principle -RRB- .
Life insurance that is not left to the estate is generally not subject to income tax . If you are the beneficiary and choose to receive payments over time , rather than in a lump sum , you may pay income tax on the interest that is paid to you by the life insurance company . Also , if the policy was a modified endowment contract , or had more cash value than the original face amount , there may be some tax consequences . Most people receive their benefits tax free . Life insurance left to the estate -LRB- either on purpose or by default , because no listed beneficiaries are alive -RRB- will be subject to probate expenses and taxes . Also , life insurance is subject to state and federal estate taxes if it exceeds the exempted amount and conditions .
No , Life Insurance is not exempt from state or federal estate tax unless it is of an amount that is exempted by law . That amount varies by state for state estate taxes , and a few states do not have state estate tax -LRB- or inheritance tax -RRB- at all . The limit in 2013 for federal estate tax is $ 5,250,000 . If the estate is larger than that with life insurance proceeds included , federal estate tax will be owed on the amount that is not exempt . Life insurance that is properly set up in an irrevocable life insurance trust is not subject to estate tax .
If the owner and insured person of a life insurance policy passes away , and has no surviving spouse , the death benefit of the policy will be added to the value of his/her estate . If this total exceeds state or federal estate tax exemptions , the excess would incur estate taxes . As of now , only 21 states have state estate and/or inheritance taxes . The exemption for federal estate taxes in 2013 is $ 5,250,000 . So the government taxes relatively few policies with estate taxes . Life insurance is not subject to income tax , except in some cash policy situations . If someone collects their life insurance proceeds periodically rather than in a lump sum , they will be paid interest on the as-yet-unpaid amount , and the interest is taxed . Generally speaking , the tax benefits of life insurance is one of the features that make is so desirable .
The term `` qualified '' should really be `` tax-qualified '' . A tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy -LRB- TQ -RRB- is one that pays out benefits that are not subject -LRB- in most cases -RRB- to income taxation in the year that they are received by the policy owner . -LRB- See `` NOTE '' , below . -RRB- The benefits paid out froma `` non-qualified '' long-term care policy -LRB- NTQ -RRB- may be subject to income tax in the year that they are received . Policies purchased prior to 1998 should be reviewed by a qualified tax advisor for any questions about taxation of benefits . Legislation in 1996 allowed for federal exemption from benefit payout taxationfor policies purchased after a certain datethat metspecific requirements outlined in that legislation . NOTE : LTC insurance policies that payout their benefit as a cash amount -LRB- indemnity policies -RRB- may exceed the government-allowed limit on how much of that benefit can be considered `` tax-qualified '' . If you have one of those types of policies , consult with the carrier 's policy owner service unit to determine how your benefits might be paid out should you qualify for care . Some carriers will only payout a cash benefit up to the federally-mandated limit to avoid triggering a 1099 being sent to the IRS . But , it 's better to check than be surprised .
Personal property has an owner . There are privileges and consequences of ownership . Life insurance is personal property . Life insurance always has an owner . That owner can be a person or a legal entity . The goal is not to pay estate taxes on life insurance . But it can occur at the federal and state level . The federal estate tax is uniform throughout the country . Within the federal unified credit , family assets transfer estate tax free . If assets exceed the unified credit allowance and are owned within the estate , theyll be subject to estate taxation . In addition , each state has its own threshold of asset exemption . So life insurance proceeds could exceed federal or state thresholds and could create a taxable event . So before moving forward with any estate plans or recharacterization of asset ownership consult your tax and legal counsel .
If states have inheritance taxes , yes , life insurance proceeds are subject to those . The death benefit of a life insurance policy is also subject to federal estate taxes . This year , 5.25 million dollars is exempt from federal estate taxes . Each state has their own guidelines as to what is exempt from state estate , or inheritance , taxes .
Let me add a few other cases to the previous answer . While as a general rule life insurance death benefits are not taxable , there are a few more cases that can be taxable . Not only are life insurance death benefits counted as an asset for Federal Estate Tax , it is also counted for any equivalent state tax . Many states have limits lower than federal limits and may become subject to state taxation should the entire value of the estate exceed the state exemption . Also , it is important to avoid the Goodman Triangle . There are three parties involved in a life insurance contract , besides the insurance company . There is the insured , the person being covered , the owner , the person who controls the policy and typically pays the premium , and the beneficiary , the person named to receive the death benefit . It is important that at least two of these be in common to avoid Federal Income Tax . That means the owner should be either the insured or the beneficiary . To be safe , work with an insurance professional who is familiar with these rules to help you avoid problems . Finally , should you be concerned that the benefit will be taxable it would be wise to consult with a tax professional who is familiar with both Federal rules and the rules of your state .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
In most cases , life insurance proceeds are received income tax free . If the proceeds are payable due to the policy endowing -LRB- or maturing -RRB- the gain -LRB- proceeds less premium paid -RRB- may be taxable . Life insurance policies owned by an individual with proceeds payable to the estate of the owner may be subject to federal and / or state estate taxes . Proceeds payable on a viaticized life insurance policy also may be subject to income taxes .
The answer to your question is no and yes but still pretty much no . The most effective way to structure a DI policy is after through a funding arangement that uses after tax dollars to fund the policies premiums . The reasoning is that one is investing in a DI policy to reduce the financial impact that one occurs due to either a short-term disability , a long-term disability or some merging of the two . The DI policy will be subject to state and federal taxes , either one pays with `` post-tax '' dollars which have been subject to FICA/FUTA taxes and have the benefits payed without without extra tax concerns -LRB- however the benefits will be reported and taxed as income -RRB- , or one can structure DI that are offered as a employee benefit with pre-tax funding but with increased liabilities to ones benefits -LRB- reporting is the same -RRB- . The opportunity cost of delaying that additional tax obligation does not carry with it enough benefits to offset the disadvantages . If your question is simply can you include DI premiums as qualified medical expenses that would be put them into IRC Section 213 `` tax-advantaged '' status , no you can not .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Type Of Life Insurance Is Best For Me ?
Determining product suitability is a process that includes risk assessment , financial goals and establishing a timeline based on life expectancy . Once this discovery process determines the potential policy owners needs and financial profile then you can purchase life insurance based on you needs and product suitability .
If you have a temporary need , Term Life Insurance may be best . If you want life insurance to cover your final expenses associated with funeral , Permanent Life is usually best . If you want to use Life Insurance for business purposes , you can use Term to cover key employees , or you can use Permanent to create a business succession plan with liquidity , or many other options for many other business purposes . If you have a serious health problem , your choices will be limited . If you can get one that is not graded , that will be best for you . If not , then the best one is the one you can get .
Interestingly enough , I am often asked the question , what is the best life insurance ? There is however , no overall best type that provides all solutions . What is best for you depends on your circumstances and what you want to accomplish . Universal life because of the flexibility is considered by many to be the `` best '' . Whole life and term products could also be the `` best '' , again depending on the circumstances and what you wanted to accomplish . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
To know the best type of life insurance for you , I 'd need to know some things about you . 1 -RRB- Above all , what are your needs for your life insurance ? Do you want a small policy to use for your funeral and other final expenses ? Do you want a policy that would get your three teenagers established if something happened to you ? The best life insurance for those two scenarios are very different . Discerning your purpose for your life insurance helps professionals such as myself figure out the best type and amount of coverage you need . 2 -RRB- How old are you ? Do you have any health problems ? Do you smoke ? Questions such as this give us the tools to find your best rate . 3 -RRB- What is available for you ? This is a questions we agents must answer . Some life insurance agents carry one brand of life insurance , others offer policies from scores of companies . Some agents will push one type of policy on you , others will hunt around for your best option , even if they have to refer you elsewhere . You can save a lot of time and frustration by starting with an agency who will go the extra mile to find your best type of life insurance , right from the start .
There are a number of different types of life insurance policies because there are different types of coverage needed to best suit different types of needs . Permanent life insurance with a cash value is best if you want to borrow from your own money to pay for needs like college or weddings . Term life insurance if best for temporary needs like paying off a mortgage . Universal or Whole Life is best for paying permanent needs life funeral costs . You really ca n't call one type of life insurance best . They are all best if purchased for the right need .
I believe family floater health insurance refers to a type of program available in India and not the United States . I 'm therefore not able to provide much help with advice for that type of specific program . However , when speaking in generalities regarding -LRB- U.S. -RRB- health insurance , what 's best for you may not be what 's best for someone else - meaning that no one plan is the `` best '' plan you can get . You 've got to look at what the pricing is in addition to what benefits you get under the plan and the networks they follow -LRB- if applicable -RRB- . I would suggest identifying what are the needs and goals you want met most with your coverage . Then , you should review plans that meet that criteria and go from there when you start looking at pricing . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Some questions you might ask when considering life insurance are : 1 -RRB- What is the rating of this company ? 2 -RRB- Are the rates guaranteed not to go up ? 3 -RRB- Does this policy have cash value ? If so , please show me an illustration . 4 -RRB- Will you be working with me if I need any assistance with my policy in the future ? 5 -RRB- What happens when the terms ends ? -LRB- if buying Term insurance -RRB- 6 -RRB- What riders are available for this policy ? 7 -RRB- How do I borrow from this policy ? -LRB- if buying Whole or Universal Life -RRB- 8 -RRB- What policy has the best rates for my health ? 9 -RRB- May I also get coverage for my spouse ? 10 -RRB- What if I want to drop this policy in the future ? There are many other questions you could ask , but these are some common ones that people ask me . This assumes you know how much coverage you need , and what type . Otherwise , those are also questions you will want to discuss with your agent .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There is no one best life insurance company , and no one best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are rated by rating agencies -LRB- AM Best , Standard and Poore 's , Moody 's and Fitch are the most popular -RRB- . You can look at their ratings with each agency to see how life insurance companies compare with each other . Regarding types of life insurance policies , sometimes Whole Life is best , sometimes Universal Life best suits a particular need , sometimes Term Life works best . To find the best company and policy for you and your particular need , you can visit with a reputable agent and ask them to find you the best qualify product that is suitable for your needs .
The type of life insurance policy that is best for you may be completely different from the type of life insurance policy that is best for someone else . Your age , employment , marital status , your financial goals , and a myriad of other factors all enter into what type of life insurance policy is best for you . Visit with a respected agent to get the type -LRB- s -RRB- of policies that will best meet your needs on your budget .
Video Transcript : Next question is , `` What are the best whole life companies ? '' Well , I have to divide that into a couple of sections . One is , what are the best whole life companies for indemnification ? And what are the best whole life companies if you 're using this for supplemental income ? There are several great carriers out there that are really good dividend paying whole life contracts . If you 're using it for indemnification , you want to look at the most benevolent underwriter , because that 's the game that has to be played in permanent whole life , because you 're going to be paying this premium for the rest of your life . So , I want to find out from an indemnification or protection point of view , who gives me the best number because of my health consideration ? The secondary part is , if I 'm using whole life for an actual income play , I want to be able to use whole life and a contract that actually is going to give me more rate of return . And that 's how I look at it ; is it income , or is it indemnification ?
The first step in buying life insurance is to determine how much coverage you need , what type of insurance will work best for your needs , and how much it will cost . With life insurance you can not just pick out the policy with the features that you like . You must qualify medically , and your overall mortality risk -LRB- or lack thereof -RRB- determines your rate . What company you use and the type of policy you choose also figure into the premium you will pay . So the best way to buy life insurance is to talk to an agent who can help you determine how much you need , explain what types of policies work best for that need , and then shop around to find the best rate for which you qualify . Good life insurance agencies stick with you and guide you through to the time when the policy you want is in your safe , ready to go into action if tragedy strikes . While a life insurance agent is the last person most people wish to consult , in the end , most policies require an agent as the middle person , anyway . Starting out by calling an honest agent can make the process very simple and help you save hundreds of dollars .
What does life insurance provide ? For me , piece of mind and control . The piece of mind comes from the fact that I have thought about my family and had taken steps to provide for them if for any reason I pass away . The control part comes from the type of life insurance I chose to own . I own whole life . The insurance company ca n't raise the premium on me , ca n't do anything to the policy without my consent and the policy ca n't go backwards in cash values . That 's what life insurance provides me . It may be something entirely different for someone else .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
The answer has two distinct parts to it . Part One : You can only purchase life insurance on someone you have an `` insurable interest '' in . This means you have some financial interest in them continuing to live . Such as a spouse , a child , a business associate , or some relative with whom you may be in some manner financially associated with . Part Two : Not everyone can have life insurance , except for the `` Guaranteed '' type insurance , which is for relatively low amounts of death benefit , and a relatively high premium . This may come through a group plan or a general advertisement.For the other types of life insurance , your health will be checked , unless you are a member of a group doing open enrollment , where the premiums are averaged out among sick and healthy members . After a health check , the company will make an offer of what they will charge and what death benefit they will offer . You may not get what you hoped for . Your best bet is to do everything you can to make sure your health exam will find you in the best health possible . Do not lie . They will find out . The company with the lowest rate is not always the one with the best coverage . Keep the reputation of the company in mind . Always best to go with the best life insurance company you can find who will cover you . Gary Lane 9497972424 .
At age 81 , you 're looking at permanent life insurance programs as term insurance is only offered until age 75 . If you 're looking for a small policy amount -LRB- e.g. $ 10,000 , $ 25,000 , etc. -RRB- , you 'll be looking at final expense life insurance policies . Final expense life insurance is a form of whole life insurance - the premiums remain fixed and guaranteed for life and the policy builds cash value . The underwriting typically consists of `` yes/no '' health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check - these types of programs do not have a medical exam requirement . If you 're looking for more coverage than that -LRB- e.g. $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 , $ 250,000 , etc. -RRB- , you 'll be securing it under a fully underwritten life insurance policy that requires a medical exam . Regardless of which type of life insurance you want to pursue , you should consult with an independent agent who can look at many carriers to compare rates and make sure of what you qualify for so you can get the coverage at the lowest possible cost . I work with these types of programs very often and would be happy to assist . If you would like my assistance , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and number and we can go over the options accordingly and any questions you may have . Thanks very much .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance After Open Heart Surgery ?
It is pretty easy to get a simplified issue life insurance policy after having a coronary bypass . And as the name says , you are guaranteed to qualify for a guaranteed issue policy . If you want more than $ 50,000 of coverage , whether you qualify for that amount will depend on the age at which you had your open heart surgery , how many vessels were involved , whether there were any blockages later , and how your stress tests results are now . If you smoke or have other health conditions , such as diabetes , you most likely will be declined for this type of medically underwritten policy . But if you were at an older age when you had your heart surgery , it was effective and not too extensive , there is a good chance that you can get the amount of coverage you desire .
That is an excellent question ! Yes , you can . And depending upon how long ago your surgery was , and how complication free you have been since , it should not prevent you from finding a good , affordable policy . If it has been more recent , you may find that the policies are more expensive , and come with a period called a `` grade '' that reduces your death benefit during that grade period . Your best bet is to find an agent who will look into finding you a policy that is right for you . If you would like to contact me , I 'd be glad to help . Thanks for asking !
Yes , you can ! I have done it for people . Heres a quick testimonial : a man contacted me who needed life insurance to indemnify a business loan . He had had open heart surgery several years before , and was having a really tough time getting an offer . I developed a portfolio of quote information about him , and went to market on his behalf . It didnt take too long to find out what the chief obstacle for him was : inconsistent follow-ups . The surgery had taken place in another state , and there he had a cardiologist he liked . However , he had since moved , and had not yet found a replacement physician . So he didnt bother to get a follow up . No underwriter in his right mind could make an offer without knowing his current status . I was able to persuade him that I had a good chance of getting an offer if he had good follow-ups . -LRB- Of course , from a medical point of view , he should have had follow-ups anyway . -RRB- He went ahead and connected with a local cardiologist , and had all the necessary testing done . The results were good enough to get him a decent offer , and his business loan came through . A happy ending .
After heart surgery , yes you can get life insurance . To start , there are what we call guaranteed issue policies which can give you a basic burial policy . A big question is what kind of surgery was it ? If you just had a stint put in , and it was about a year or more ago , you can apply for Life Insurance . If the surgery was more serious , then you may have to stick with a guaranteed issue . The more time that passes without incident from the surgery , the better chances you have of getting a policy . Keep in mind , the premium will be higher than if you did not have a surgery . I would contact your broker , fill out a questionnaire and see what your options are .
In order to get life insurance after heart surgery , you will usually need to wait at least a year -LRB- unless you are buying guaranteed issued life insurance , which can be issued right away but will have a graded period of at least two years before it pays 100 % -RRB- . Once a year or two is passed , you can get simplified issue life insurance in most states . These may or may not be graded and do have a fairly low minimum face amount -LRB- usually $ 50,000 or less -RRB- . If your heart surgery was a one time event , if you did not have a heart attack -LRB- or the heart attack was mild -RRB- , you now follow a heart healthy lifestyle , and if enough time has passed without event that you have been able to go off blood thinners , you should be able to get a medically underwritten policy . Even if not all these conditions are met , you may be able to get a medically underwritten policy with a `` flat extra '' for some years . Contact an impaired risk agency who understands life insurance for those with a history of heart disease to get your most affordable rate .
It is pretty easy to get a simplified issue life insurance policy after having a coronary bypass . And as the name says , you are guaranteed to qualify for a guaranteed issue policy . If you want more than $ 50,000 of coverage , whether you qualify for that amount will depend on the age at which you had your open heart surgery , how many vessels were involved , whether there were any blockages later , and how your stress tests results are now . If you smoke or have other health conditions , such as diabetes , you most likely will be declined for this type of medically underwritten policy . But if you were at an older age when you had your heart surgery , it was effective and not too extensive , there is a good chance that you can get the amount of coverage you desire .
I can give you some insight based on my own experience . A number of years ago , I had a client with a history of heart disease . He was a young guy in his early 40s . Unfortunately , by that age he had already suffered several heart attacks . Every year he would ask me to go to market and see if I could get him an additional policy . Of course , I would disclose his heart history to every new carrier . They in turn would do their due diligence and review all his medical records before approving his application . Everything was on the up and up . I did succeed in getting him additional coverage . As you can imagine , he had to pay extra due to his medical history . But for him it was worth every penny . I guess he kind of had a feeling the big one was coming . Sure enough , after I had sold him about the fifth the policy , he did have another heart attack . It was a bad one , and he had to go into surgery . He died on the operating table . As the broker , I expedited all the claims . One of them was shortly after the policy has been put into force . You can imagine how the insurance company took a close look at that claim . I was very confident that things would go smoothly because I had gone through full disclosure , and the carrier was fully aware of his medical history . I knew it , and they knew it . Nothing to hide . The net result was that it took less than a week of additional time for the benefit check to be issued .
Yes , you can ! I have done it for people . Heres a quick testimonial : a man contacted me who needed life insurance to indemnify a business loan . He had had open heart surgery several years before , and was having a really tough time getting an offer . I developed a portfolio of quote information about him , and went to market on his behalf . It didnt take too long to find out what the chief obstacle for him was : inconsistent follow-ups . The surgery had taken place in another state , and there he had a cardiologist he liked . However , he had since moved , and had not yet found a replacement physician . So he didnt bother to get a follow up . No underwriter in his right mind could make an offer without knowing his current status . I was able to persuade him that I had a good chance of getting an offer if he had good follow-ups . -LRB- Of course , from a medical point of view , he should have had follow-ups anyway . -RRB- He went ahead and connected with a local cardiologist , and had all the necessary testing done . The results were good enough to get him a decent offer , and his business loan came through . A happy ending .
After heart surgery , yes you can get life insurance . To start , there are what we call guaranteed issue policies which can give you a basic burial policy . A big question is what kind of surgery was it ? If you just had a stint put in , and it was about a year or more ago , you can apply for Life Insurance . If the surgery was more serious , then you may have to stick with a guaranteed issue . The more time that passes without incident from the surgery , the better chances you have of getting a policy . Keep in mind , the premium will be higher than if you did not have a surgery . I would contact your broker , fill out a questionnaire and see what your options are .
You should be able to get life insurance after a heart attack , but it can take a while until you are able to be approved for life insurance . Most nonmed policies require a waiting period of at least one year after a heart attack . Medically underwritten policies can be more lenient , or much stricter . That is because they look at the total picture : smoking status , weight , complicating health conditions such as diabetes , etc. . If the heart attack was an isolated incident and steps have been taken to prevent another one , one may be able to get life insurance shortly after suffering a heart attack . If the whole health picture is unfavorable , the person who had the heart attack may need to take guaranteed issued life insurance . Normally , the case is middle ground , so finding a life insurance agent that specializes in heart disease can be very helpful .
Yes , most people can get life insurance after a heart attack . The type , quantity , and price of the life insurance that one can get after a heart attack depends on a number of variables . These include : The age at which the heart attack occurred -LRB- the older , the better , for life insurance purposes -RRB- . The severity of the heart attack . What treatment followed -LRB- bypass ? stent ? etc -RRB- . Whether the treatment was successful and there was not recurrence for several years . If healthy life habits were pursued -LRB- e.g. quit smoking , exercise regularly , etc -RRB- . Number of cardiac events . Ejection fraction of heart , stress test results , and other cardiac tests . If unable to get a medically underwritten policy , there are some simplified issue policies that simply ask if a heart attack has occurred in the past # of years . Your agent getting a full health history and being able to shop multiple carriers will ensure that you get the best life insurance rate post heart attack .
Medicare pays for heart surgery that is medically necessary . This would include aortic valve replacement . Aortic valve replacement is inpatient surgery . After the 2013 Part A deductible is met -LRB- $ 1184 -RRB- Medicare will cover most of your inpatient charges in full . Follow up care after discharge is covered under Part B and subject to the $ 147 deductible .
There are many kinds of life insurance policies , some harder to get than others . At our office , we start with the hardest to get -LRB- least expensive -RRB- and work our way through the choices until we find the best price and policy for which our clients will qualify . In states that offer it , guaranteed issue life insurance is the easiest to get , and most expensive . But it also has age limitations , so not everyone can get it . Not counting guaranteed issue life insurance or simplified issue life insurance -LRB- both good options for those who can not get anything else -RRB- , here are some things that could keep you from getting medically underwritten Life Insurance : 1 . A serious health condition that is not , or can not be , controlled . 2 . AIDS or HIV positive 3 . Drug or alcohol treatment in the last year 4 . Current or recent felony or probation 5 . Cancer , heart attack or stroke within the past year 6 . Having had some tests done to determine if you have a health condition , with the results not yet back . Or a surgery coming up shortly ; most companies will postpone until the surgery is over . 7 . Not having US citizenship , work VISA or Green Card 8 . Suspended drivers license 9 . Cognitive impairment 10 . A child under 20 with a serious health condition , whether controlled or not 11 . Being in a wheelchair and/or needing assistance to do activities of daily living such as dressing or bathing 12 . Being on oxygen or dialysis 13 . Being diagnosed as terminally ill Again , there are options for most situations , even those above , if you get the right type of policy . An agency that understands impaired risk underwriting , and that carries many different types of life insurance , is your best bet for finding a policy when you have a challenging health or risk history .
Halifax Critical Illness Covers the following Conditions -LRB- please consult them directly to confirm the listed conditions are still covered -RRB- : Alzheimers Aorta graft surgery Aplastic anaemia Bacterial meningitis Benign brain tumor Blindness Cancer Coma Coronary artery by-pass surgery Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Deafness Heart Attack Heart Valve replacement or repair HIV/AIDS as a result of physical assault or accident HIV/AIDS from blood transfusion Kidney failure Loss of limbs Loss of speech Major organ transplant Motor neurone disease MS Parkinson 's Stroke Third degree burns Total permanent disability
If your family member is just being treated for high cholesterol , then the answer would be no . Family medical history in life insurance underwriting generally focuses on whether a parent or a sibling of the proposed insured has developed heart disease or cancer prior to the age of 60 . Heart disease refers to items such as coronary artery disease , the placement of stents , bypass surgery , pacemaker , heart valve transplant , and other heart conditions . High cholesterol would not require a yes response . When looking for coverage , it 's important to compare multiple carriers for the coverage . Your full medical history will determine the risk classification you can qualify for - the risk class determines what the rates will be for coverage . In addition , every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines , meaning that each carrier can assign a different risk class to the same medical profile - one carrier may consider standard where another one may consider preferred . Your height/weight profile , prescriptions you 're taking , current conditions under treatment , conditions treated in the last 10 + years , any tobacco usage , and other factors affect the risk classifications carriers will consider . Determining the availability for preferred rates for your program would be best discussed with an independent insurance agent who can review your medical history , evaluate the risk class considerations , and compare a variety of options for you to make sure you 're securing the coverage at the lowest possible cost . Depending on how old the existing policy is , whether it 's term or permanent insurance , and what the premium is on it , you may want to consider securing a new policy that totals what the coverage would be if kept separately . Especially if it 's term insurance , a new policy would allow you to secure a new term rate guarantee where as the existing policy has fewer years remaining . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A medical exam for the coverage typically consists of a paramedical exam -LRB- height/weight check and vitals checks such as pulse and blood pressure readings -RRB- , a blood test , and a urine test - sometimes an EKG and/or cognitive testing may be required for older age individuals -RRB- . Even if it 's not asked specifically on the application itself , the carrier will see the input regarding the wls -LRB- I 'm assuming stands for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- surgery in the APS from your doctor . For any fully underwritten life insurance program , the carrier will request a copy of an APS from your doctor , in addition to the completion of a medical exam conducted for the insurance policy -RRB- . An APS is an Attending Physician Statement - in short , it 's a doctor 's summary of your medical history records . For example , if you were being treated for diabetes , it would cite your A1C reading history , prescriptions prescribed for the condition , when it was diagnosed , etc. . In the APS , the carrier will see in the doctor 's notes that you have discussed getting the wls surgery -LRB- I 'm assuming that `` wls '' is supposed to stand for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- and ask if a surgery has been scheduled and/or completed . If it has n't been completed yet , a carrier will postpone approving you for the coverage because you have an outstanding medical procedure on the books that 's still supposed to get done . From a carrier 's perspective , their risk of a claim is greatly increased when they know a surgical operation is upcoming as complications can always occur during any surgery . Please note , after a weight loss surgery procedure and you 've ideally lost a large amount of weight and want to apply for coverage , part of that weight loss can be added in to a carrier 's calculation of height/weight profile . The reason for this is quick weight loss for people -LRB- whether via surgery , diet and exercise , liposuction , etc. -RRB- can often result in some individuals gaining a percentage of that weight back - unfortunately not everyone always keeps all of the pounds off . So if you apply for coverage within 12 months of that rapid weight loss , a carrier may add half the weight loss amount back to your total . For example , if you weight 300 pounds and loss 120 pounds after a procedure , now you 're sitting at 180 pounds . If you applied for coverage soon after having lost that 120 pounds , the carrier would add 60 back to your total and base the underwriting on a height/weight profile of 240 pounds -LRB- 180 +60 -RRB- . The purpose of the 12 month differential is to show stability in the person 's weight loss and that they have a good chance of keeping off the weight . Please also note , alternative options will still result in the same outcome -LRB- e.g. non-medical life insurance -RRB- because a question on almost every application will ask in some format `` are there any outstanding tests or other medical procedures outstanding or waiting to be completed '' . You would only be able to secure a graded policy with a low face amount -LRB- $ 25k or $ 50k maximum -RRB- , which does not appear to be in the ballpark of the coverage you 're looking to secure -LRB- you noted $ 900k in your question 's statement -RRB- . If you have a policy already in force , you can elect to convert all or a portion of it to permanent coverage . The conversion would keep the risk class that the original policy had and would simply just calculate the rates based on your age . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Not only in just this case , but in general , it is usually not possible to apply for a medically underwritten life insurance policy months before a major surgery . Most policies want you to wait until after the surgery to apply . With Marfan Syndrome , you may only be able to purchase nonmed , simplified issue polices . I know that Marfan 's is often diagnosed while in adolescence , so you may not be old enough , yet , to purchase a guaranteed issue policy . If you are 40 or over , you should be able to get one . About a year after your surgery , contact an agency that specializes in impaired risk life insurance and get something , then try again a year after that . If you time it right , you should be able to get a few affordable policies together to carry on throughout your life .
Yes , most people who have had a heart attack and get life insurance . If you were under age 40 when you had your heart attack , you may need to settle for guaranteed issue or simplified issue life insurance . If your heart attack was at an older age , your heart function is still good , you have addressed any issues that led to the heart attack -LRB- CAD , diet , etc -RRB- , and several years have passed since having the heart attack , you should be able to get a medically underwritten policy . If you have just suffered your heart attack , your choices will be limited to graded policies for a few years . But you can get life insurance in most states .
Accidental Life Insurance will only pay if the death was the result of an accident , it will not pay for a death due to natural causes . In most cases an accidental death is the result of some physical injury or trauma . Examples would be death from a car accident , falling off a roof , or being shot . Normally a heart attack would be the result of a medical condition -LRB- natural causes -RRB- and not the result of an accident . That being said , it is possible that a person could die of a heart attack that was the result of an accident . There could be a case where a person was skydiving and unable to open there parachute . This realization could trigger a heart attack causing the person to die before hitting the ground . This would be a case of a heart attack caused by an accident , not caused by natural causes .
Yes , you can be declined for Medigap insurance , but there 's usually a company that will likely take you unless certain events occur -LRB- e.g. you 're about to go in for major surgery -RRB- When you apply for Medigap coverage outside of your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare -LRB- and do n't have a special enrollment period qualifying event -RRB- , you can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering the health questions on the application -RRB- . Each insurance company has their own health questions so you may be able to qualify for one company and not another if you have certain major medical conditions you 're being treated for/have been treated for in the last few years -LRB- e.g. insulin-dependent diabetic , heart disease , cancer history , etc. -RRB- . This makes when you 're new to Medicare the best time to first buy a Medigap plan . You will have a a 6-month window to buy any Medigap plan and the carrier can not decline you for any medical issues - meaning no medical underwriting during this period . You should work with an independent broker who can review options from many companies and make sure that the Medigap plan you purchase is offering you the benefits at the lowest possible cost . Please remember , Medigap plans are standardized , meaning that regardless of the insurance company you have the coverage through , they will ALL pay the same exact way . The only difference is the price you 're paying . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap insurance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How To Decide How Much Renters Insurance To Get ?
To decide how much renters insurance to get you should sit down and do an inventory of everything you have that you would have to replace if there was a flood or fire . Be sure and figure the replacement cost of the property you own and not what you think it is worth . Also be sure and stipulate that you want a replacement value policy .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Why are you being forced to buy health insurance ? Well , long story short , the Federal Government decided at this point in time that health insurance is no longer a state 's right to decide and have taken over oversight of health care . Prior to this federal act , states were left to decide how much or how little health insurance an individual had to buy . Some states -LRB- Haiwaii -RRB- have a sort of single payor . others allow much more choice in health plans including the choice not to purchase . While I would not consider going without insurance , I do agree it should be up to the individual to decide .
Yes , Life Insurance can go to pay debts . The purpose of Life Insurance is to relieve financial stress which your heirs or beneficiaries will endure . Life Insurance provides the opportunity to help those you care about or to protect you business from undue financial expenses or replacement of income . When you decide to get Life Insurance , it is important to figure out how much you want to leave . One way to think about this for loved ones is to decide how much do you want them to have annually or monthly and for how long ? Does there need to be some immediate monies to pay for final expenses ? This is a good exercise to get you started .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
You really should n't start out by deciding how much to pay . You should start out by deciding what kind and how much . You may find that you need some term and some whole-life . Once you determine that find out what the price is for what you need . If it 's too much , buy the term only but make certain that it 's convertible to whole-life later .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What To Look For In A Term Life Insurance Policy ?
The most important thing to look for in a term policy is convertability . Convertability is the ability to go to a permanent policy without having to proove `` insurability '' from the term policy company . Why is this so important ? Term is for a temporary need . Term covers a piece of time and what happens inside that period of time . If you live past that period of time , and still need insurance you will be faced with a great increased cost that will rise every year there after , so conversion gives you the opportunity to continue you coverage at a rate class you may never qualify again for .
There are several features that can make one term life insurance policy more preferable than another . Among them are : 1 -RRB- The price and death benefit are guaranteed to stay the same for the full term , 2 -RRB- The policy is convertible to permanent insurance without evidence of insurability for an extended period of time , and 3 -RRB- The carrier is reputable and highly rated . In addition , some Term policies offer riders that might help you achieve your purposes . These include Child Rider , Accidental Death Rider , Waiver of Disability Rider , Disability Income Rider , and more .
Work with your Insurance Professional to identify your need and match the solution that best meets that need . Coverage and premium should be level for the period of time that you need it . The policy should also offer a guaranteed opportunity to convert all or a portion of the coverage into permanent coverage as the need may present itself .
First make sure that it is a level term policy and the term should be a 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 yr level term , the 20yr usually being the optimal term for most . You must dertemine this by looking at your debt , mortgage balance , age of children , and income of the husband and spouse . Also , some term policies offer living benefits such as terminal illness , critical illness , and cronic illness as riders at a small cost . You must decide if the added cost gives you a comfort of additional coverage . Term life insurance is a simple way of protecting lives in the most economical way allowing additional money in the budget to pay down debt and build assets .
I suppose the best approach is what to avoid when buying a term life insurance policy . Personally , I would avoid a policy that is offered free of medical qualification if I knew that I was in satisfactory shape . I would be reluctant to buy a term life insurance policy that was offered through the mail or over the radio . In the end I would buy a term life insurance policy from an agent that I trusted .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from InsuranceLibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is term life insurance better than permanent life insurance ? '' Well , did you hear the two words in there ? One is term and one is permanent . When I 'm looking at term insurance , I 'm looking at obligations . I 'm looking at liabilities that I may that are temporal that they are not forever . And so I 'm going to look at term insurance to cover those ideas , those indemnification needs , and if I have permanent needs them I 'm going have to look at different forms of life insurance that are permanent . It could be Par Whole Life . It could Current Assumption UL . It could be Indexed Universal Life . It could be Variable Life , depending upon what my propensity for risks are , but I 'm always looking , is this a temporary expense reimbursement ? Or is this a permanent need that will never go away ? It 's never not is term insurance better or worse than permanent ? It 's the issue of the need . Well , that 's our consumer question for the day . If you have any questions just submit them to www.InsuranceLibrary.com .
Video Transcript : What is supplemental life insurance ? Supplemental life insurance can be extra insurance that you have above and beyond either your group plan at work or individually-purchased life insurance . If you purchased this and you need more , some people look at supplemental life insurance to augment what they already have . You may want to look at this in 2 ways '' ` Would I like to have more coverage or would I like to have a supplemental retirement income plan , an extra cash value contract , that can generate withdrawals to basis and policy loans to gain tax-free , as long as I keep the policy in force for the life of the policy insured ? ' If I 'm looking at it as a supplemental income play or I 'm looking at it as a supplemental death benefit , supplemental life insurance can be a great adjunct to what I already have , either by group or by my individual purchase .
What you look for in life insurance will depend on what your specific needs are . If you need temporary insurance coverage , then you should probably look for term policies and compare prices to ensure you get a good price . If you are looking for permanent coverage , or are looking to use life insurance as an asset/cash accumulation tool you should look for policies from companies with strong financial ratings and a strong track record for either paying interest or dividends .
A lot of it depends on personal preference and what your concerns are . If you want to make sure it 's with a top-rated company who is financially strong and stable , you want to look at what their rating is -LRB- e.g. A.M. Best ratings : A , A + , and A + + indicate superior financial ratings -RRB- . If you 're looking at permanent , long-term coverage , you may want to look at the most stable companies because you want them to be there for the next 50 , 60 , 70 , years . If you 're only looking for a 10-year term insurance policy , you may be willing to look at a company with less favorable numbers because their rates are cheaper . It can also be helpful to look into reviews that people say about the company - positive aspects , any major continuous issues with claims , etc. ? The other major thing that everyone looks at is pricing - your premiums that you pay . There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' life insurance policy . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . This is because people may qualify for different risk classes -LRB- one of the single-most critical things to think about with coverage -RRB- , they may be looking to secure a different amount of coverage , keep the coverage for a different length of time , or may live in a different state -LRB- not every product from every carrier is available in every state -RRB- . All of these factors go into the calculation of rates . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies and make sure that the policy you apply for is best serving the desired needs that you want to have the coverage in place to protect .
That is a great question ! There are a million people that will line up to help you put together a plan . Some will honestly want to help you , and some will look at you like a wolf looks at a fat , three-legged sheep . Please be careful , and go with someone that comes with high recommendations . Here 's what you can do to get started . Take a few minutes , and decide what retirement looks like to you . Are you fishing , travelling , working , not working , debt free ? Now take a look at your current financial status . What do you need to do between here , and retirement to make that happen ? I tell people that if you want to live at your current standard of living in retirement , then you will want to have squirreled away between 8-10 times what your current salary is . If you want to live better than you are now , then you 've really got to get started . Once you 've got an idea of what you need to save , then you can talk to your HR person at work about company match 401k , or other programs they might offer ; You can talk to your insurance agent or banker and get some ideas , or you can find an advisor that can help you take a look at how to make your vision of retirement a comfortable reality . I hope that gives you an idea , feel free to drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
That is a great question , but a really hard one to answer . Without knowing what your specific goals for the policy are , -LRB- income replacement , cash value growth , debt coverage , a legacy to leave behind , or simply covering funeral expenses -RRB- it 's really difficult to give you a specific answer . I 'd tell you this - if you are looking for a policy that will cover your funeral expenses , leave something behind , or to draw money from , look for a whole life policy . If you are looking for short term coverage , say to cover college debt , buy a term life policy . If money is tight , and you are looking to cover expenses and hopefully leave some behind , get a mix of whole and term life policies , to fit your needs and budget . A good agent will walk you through this . If you need help , drop me a line , ok ? Thanks for asking !
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
What do you need to know about term life insurance ? You need to know that : 1 -RRB- Unless you have some type of rider stating otherwise , term life insurance will jump way up in price at the end of the term , and go up in price annually after that . Or it will end at the end of the term . 2 -RRB- Most term life insurance will stay the same premium during the entire term , and the death benefit will stay the same for the entire term . But you need to ask your agent to make sure you are buying a guaranteed level premium , and a guaranteed level death benefit , to be sure . 3 -RRB- There is no cash value in term life insurance . Only ROP -LRB- return of premium -RRB- term will pay back a substantial cash value if you keep it enough years , and are alive at the end of the term . 4 -RRB- If you miss a payment more than two months , your term policy will end . There is no cash value in it to pay the premium , so it is very important to keep up your payments with term life insurance . 5 -RRB- Many term policies are convertible to permanent insurance for at least part of the term period . If you convert your term policy , you must convert it to the policy or policies stipulated by the life insurance company at that point in time . These policies may or may not have lifetime guarantees , but will be UL or WL . The rate will be based on your age at the time of conversion . There are no health requirements ; your permanent policy will be rated similarly to what your term policy was rated .
At age 81 , you 're looking at permanent life insurance programs as term insurance is only offered until age 75 . If you 're looking for a small policy amount -LRB- e.g. $ 10,000 , $ 25,000 , etc. -RRB- , you 'll be looking at final expense life insurance policies . Final expense life insurance is a form of whole life insurance - the premiums remain fixed and guaranteed for life and the policy builds cash value . The underwriting typically consists of `` yes/no '' health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check - these types of programs do not have a medical exam requirement . If you 're looking for more coverage than that -LRB- e.g. $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 , $ 250,000 , etc. -RRB- , you 'll be securing it under a fully underwritten life insurance policy that requires a medical exam . Regardless of which type of life insurance you want to pursue , you should consult with an independent agent who can look at many carriers to compare rates and make sure of what you qualify for so you can get the coverage at the lowest possible cost . I work with these types of programs very often and would be happy to assist . If you would like my assistance , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and number and we can go over the options accordingly and any questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Term life insurance has very few variables , so many companies offer good Term Life policies . The main things to look for are a guaranteed level premium , a guaranteed level face amount , and conversion options . Aside from looking at the policy , you can look at the rating of the company . The policy is only as good as the company that issues it . Any rating above an A is what I feel is a secure rating for a life insurance company .
Only you can answer this question of Life Insurance being essential . For those of us who see the financial loss in families who lost a parent or spouse , Life Insurance relieves financial stress allowing you to take care of what is most important , your family . YES , I believe life insurance is essential . Life Insurance provides you or rather your beneficiary with monies otherwise would not be available . You need to look at what is important in your life , who depends on you , your family , perhaps your business and look at what will happen if you are not there `` tomorrow '' . What will happen financially and how would you relieve that financial stress .
No . Term insurance is exactly what its name implies , you a buying protection -LRB- some might say renting it -RRB- against the possibility of death occurring during a specified period of time . Term Life Insurance is the least expensive form of life insurance because of its defined duration and because it does not contain any cash build up provisions . Some life insurance companies `` enhance '' their term life products with an option called `` Return of Premium '' but the policyholder pays extra premium above and beyond the cost of the basic term life insurance policy for this privilege . Essentially you are loaning the insurance company your money interest free for them to invest for 10 , 20 or 30 years while simply returning the original money you paid in at the end of the policy 's term . I wo n't argue whether this is a good or a bad investment of money , many people are lousy savers so this approach would give them some money at some future date . However , if you look at the price difference between a pure term life policy and a term life policy with the same death benefit amount and the Return of Premium feature and you invested that difference in a mutual fund or the stock market over the same time frames I suspect the vast majority of people would end up with more money by going down the investment route . You should definitely discuss this with a financial planner or other impartial advisor before making the decision to purchase term life insurance with or without the return of premium option . As an insurance sales person , I definitely believe in the value of life insurance , both term and permanent . But the commissions earned are higher when we sell you a term life policy with the return of premium provision simply because the premiums are higher . If your agent does n't at least touch on these issues with you , perhaps you should visit with another life insurance agent .
Video Transcript : What do life insurance companies test for ? As you well may know , people have to go through , generally , paramedical exams that look at 3 things , generally : Your blood , your urine , and sometimes EKG . All these can be performed at your home , your office , or other places of convenience . They 're really looking for different areas . It has 24 different areas they 're looking at . They 're looking at the outside normal range which can dictate diabetic conditions or cancer conditions . They 're looking for different diseases that the blood and urine workup will actually display on the panels and really tip them off to other areas such as drug use , tobacco use , alcohol use . They 're looking for all these areas because those are mortality-driven areas , and they actually have a really big impact on the price tag that you 'll pay .
This is a great question that I was just answering last night with another client . The first and foremost thing that you should look for is an agent . Even though much of the world buys insurance over the phone , a local agent can help you determine what types of coverage you want and need and is familiar with the local area . Being familiar helps in determining the reconstruction cost vs the selling price vs the tax value . All three numbers are usually different . Most people do not want to be either under or over insured , and a local agent will help with that . The second thing to look for is the company writing the policy . You will never know how good your insurance is until you need it . When a minor claim happens typically every insurance company will be able and willing to pay the claim . It is when the catastrophic occurs that you really get what you pay for . Thousands of dollars and many hours can be wasted when your insurance company is unwilling to agree with you . This is also another reason to have local agent representation . Third and finally is look at what other coverages are available and discuss whether or not you want to buy those coverages or self insure . Some of my favorite must haves are : replacement cost on contents , increased construction costs and replacement cost on the home itself , a deductible that you can afford to pay tomorrow if needed , sewer back up if you live downhill of anyone , A-rated carrier , and local claims personnel . There are many more topics that need to be discussed and reviewed which is why my # 1 recommendation on what to look for when buying home insurance is a great local agent .
Great question ! There are a couple of things that you want to ask yourself before shopping for a policy . Ask yourself : What do I want this policy to do for me - provide burial expenses , transfer wealth to my survivors , provide a potential retirement income , or protect against a major expense like college or a mortgage ? How long will I need this coverage ? If you want it to last as long as you do , then you would want to look at a whole life policy instead of a term product . If you are looking to cover a short term risk , then a term policy is the better choice . Once you have an idea of what you want the insurance to do for you , figure out what you can afford to spend . Remember that life insurance is like buying a new car . You stop making timely payments , and one day your car is gone . The same thing happens to the money that you have paid into your policy . Find an independent agent , -LRB- one not tied to a specific brand -RRB- who can help you compare companies , policies , and what they will do for you.If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to make time for you . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Term Life Insurance Should I Get ?
If you are asking what length of term life insurance to get , that depends on the need for which you are purchasing the policy . Generally , it is a good idea to lock in your rate for as long a term as possible , because no one knows what their health will be the next time they apply . Also , age makes a big difference in premiums , especially in men and those who need to add on table ratings due to a health condition . However , if you are buying life insurance to pay off a mortgage for which only 7 years are left , getting a short term policy makes more sense .
Product suitability for each proposed insured and the policy owner is very important , but bottom line the price rules the day . There are provisional nuisances that are important life convertibility to permanent insurance as one example . Gender , age , smoking status and health condition are personal factors that enter into the purchase decision . Some companies are more benevolent with impairments that others . Claims paying ability is very important , so a high ranked company is desirable .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
There is no set guideline to how much you should pay for Term Life Insurance . There are general guidelines . E.g. . If you take a 10 year term policy , you should pay less than you would pay for a 30 year term policy . If the rates are similar you are much better off locking that rate in for 30 years . Another general guideline would be , if you can get a permanent policy for a price just slightly higher than term , take the permanent policy . Sometimes Universal Life rates run close to Term rates at older ages , especially if the UL rates are locked in to age 90 or 95 . Universal Life is much more flexible than Term , so if you can get it for a similar price , go for it . Aside from generalities , no one can predict how much you should pay for a term life insurance policy because life insurance rates are based on your age , sex , tobacco status , and health . You can check out an instant quote engine on internet websites to get an idea of what term rates might run for you . But you need to call the agency to get a more accurate rate .
Term Life Insurance does not have cash value , but if you get what is called Return of Premium Term -LRB- ROP Term -RRB- , it has a form of cash value . About midway through the term , depending on the policy , it will pay back some of the premiums paid in , IF you cancel the policy . By the end of the term , this type of policy will generally pay back all the premiums you paid in . Some negatives : This cash is not available unless you surrender the policy . If you are table rated , it may be that only the premiums up to standard are paid back to you . The price is substantially higher than regular Term Life Insurance . Some positives : If you bought regular Term Life and invested the extra you would have spent on ROP Term , it could take a return of over 5 % every year on the difference , to earn what you would get back , tax free , by keeping ROP Term to the end . Unlike regular Term , longer terms often cost less than shorter terms , with ROP Term . Finally , getting back all your premiums if you are still alive at the end of the term is a great way to have `` free '' coverage and then get back enough for a final expense fund when the term ends .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
No . Term insurance is exactly what its name implies , you a buying protection -LRB- some might say renting it -RRB- against the possibility of death occurring during a specified period of time . Term Life Insurance is the least expensive form of life insurance because of its defined duration and because it does not contain any cash build up provisions . Some life insurance companies `` enhance '' their term life products with an option called `` Return of Premium '' but the policyholder pays extra premium above and beyond the cost of the basic term life insurance policy for this privilege . Essentially you are loaning the insurance company your money interest free for them to invest for 10 , 20 or 30 years while simply returning the original money you paid in at the end of the policy 's term . I wo n't argue whether this is a good or a bad investment of money , many people are lousy savers so this approach would give them some money at some future date . However , if you look at the price difference between a pure term life policy and a term life policy with the same death benefit amount and the Return of Premium feature and you invested that difference in a mutual fund or the stock market over the same time frames I suspect the vast majority of people would end up with more money by going down the investment route . You should definitely discuss this with a financial planner or other impartial advisor before making the decision to purchase term life insurance with or without the return of premium option . As an insurance sales person , I definitely believe in the value of life insurance , both term and permanent . But the commissions earned are higher when we sell you a term life policy with the return of premium provision simply because the premiums are higher . If your agent does n't at least touch on these issues with you , perhaps you should visit with another life insurance agent .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
At what age do you get life insurance has a simple answer . You can get life insurance at any age . Your parents can get it for you the day you are born if they so choose . Perhaps the better question might be when should you consider getting life insurance ? If you have a family , spouse or just children you should consider getting life insurance . If you own a small business , have key employee 's and/or a business partner , you might consider life insurance . If your concerned about your estate or would like to build tax free income for retirement , you might consider life insurance . You see , it really is not about your age so much but what is the purpose of the insurance . That said , the younger you are , the cost if insurance is less .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
A life insurance brokerage is a business through which multiple life insurance carriers are represented . The brokers that are affiliated with the brokerage are appointed with different companies . A successful brokerage one that really gets the job done for the consumer should have certain characteristics . First of all , it should specialize in one product line : life insurance . The broker should be a master of his craft . He or she should be an expert in life insurance underwriting , because it is through getting good underwriting that you deliver the best value to your client . Good underwriting can give you the lowest rate/highest cash value accumulation . If the broker sells multiple products , such as life insurance , and annuities , and disability insurance , and investments , etc. , then he really is a jack of all trades and master of none . Another point is that the brokerage should be run just as any good business is run . You make commitments and you deliver on them . This means that the sales model of the brokerage should be to provide a quote about which they are confident the client will be approved . It is common business sense to quote a reliable price . Prequalification should therefore be an essential part of the service the brokerage provides . Clients are entitled to know the company , product , and price before submitting a formal application . Then all involved can be sure that going through underwriting will be worthwhile . A brokerage operation should be designed to make the purchase of life insurance a very satisfying experience for the consumer .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
At LifeQuotes.com we like to have applicants articulate why they want life insurance to make sure that we recommend the right policy from among our 35 life insurers . Important questions to answer are : Why do I think I need life insurance ? Who should get what if I die ? Who are my current dependents ? What is my current and future debt situation ? By when will I have no dependents in my life that I am responsible for ? What would my spouse do or live on if I died ?
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
What Is The Difference Between Life Insurance And Critical Illness Cover ?
Life insurance covers against the loss incurred upon the death of an individual . Dying is the triggering event that makes the insurer pay a claim . Critical illness insurance covers against the loss incurred by a major medical condition like stroke , heart attack , or cancer . The triggering event is the illness . The insurer pays a claim to help cover the costs associated with the illness .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness insurance is that the life insurance pays the benefit upon the death of the insured person , whereas the critical illness insurance pays the benefit when the insured is diagnosed with a critical illness . The life insurance benefit goes to the beneficiary chosen by the owner of the policy . The critical illness insurance benefit goes to the person who owns the policy .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
Accident and Critical illness insurance are similar in structure , but cover different things . Both policies will typically pay out a lump sum or up the benefit amount directly to the insured or a provider of their choice . The difference however is that accident plans only cover medical expenses associated with an accident where as critical illness insurance pays lump sum upon diagnosis of a major critical illness . Make sure to read the list of covered critical illness ' in the policy before purchasing .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness is that life insurance pays in the event of an unfortunate mishap upon the life of the policyholder . Life insurance pays an accelerated benefits upon the event of terminal illness in order to pay for medical bills including a waiver of premium for the time . Critical illness is a cash indemnity policy that pays cash benefits in lump sum tax free . Heart attack , stroke , kidney failure , and cancer are all covered . Lump sum payments are from 20,000 to 1,000,000 depending on company and policy .
Critical Illness insurance is a specified disease based coverage meant to provide a tax free , lump sum face amount up diagnosis of a covered illness.There are several insurance carriers who offer this coverage and as you can imagine , each carrier covers different conditions . That said , there are a select few States where the Department of Insurance has not approved Critical Illness insurance for sale within that specific State . Anyway , of all the conditions covered ... the most important are Heart Attack , Cancer and Stroke . Not to downplay the seriousness of other diagnosed conditions but nearly 80 % of all claims that will get paid from these policies are due to those three conditions . Each carrier offers coverage for other conditions . Some carriers offer coverage for 21 different conditions , while other carriers may limit their coverage to 4 or 5 conditions . Please understand that when looking into Critical Illness coverage , the most important thing to look for is not just what conditions are covered but how they are covered . The benefit definitions are a major consideration and it is `` critical '' -LRB- pardon the pun -RRB- to know the benefit definitions prior to purchase . There are carriers who provide a stroke benefit but will not pay a benefit unless the neurological deficit of the stroke persists for 30 days ... whereas there area few carriers who will pay a stroke benefit once the neurological deficit persists 96 hours . I hope this helped answer your question .
It 's 2016 . Let me add to this with an updated reply : We work with about 12 carriers that offer Critical Illness . There only tends to be two `` not covered areas '' with some policies . # 1 . Certain types of Skin cancer are not covered . Skin cancer means melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer . Understand if and at what level skin cancers are covered . Melanoma of the skin , the deadliest form of skin cancer , is the fifth most common type of new cancer diagnosis in American men and the seventh most common type in American women . SO make sure skin cancer is covered . # 2 Know the difference between Invasive Cancer & Carcinoma in Situ -LRB- Non-Invasive Cancer -RRB- . All policies pay a reduced amount for in Situ . Carcinoma in Situ is the earliest form of cancer which involves only the tissue where it is found and has not invaded the surrounding tissue or organs in the body . So when the cancer is smaller and localized , it 's not nearly as `` threatening '' . The benefit amount for in Situ is a percentage of the full amount . So if you bought a $ 10,000 critical illness policy , a typical plan pays 25 % of the benefit amount for in Situ . Or in this example , $ 2500 . The good news is that the other $ 7500 is still there for you to access should the cancer spread . KNOW the percentage that is paid out . I still believe some carriers only pay out at 10 % for in Situ ... I suggest a carrier that is at 25 % . So this is n't a `` not covered issue '' . Invasive vs. in Situ is just know at what level your benefit pays out . Something else ... we lean towards plans that trigger a benefit upon diagnosis , not treatment of , the critical illness . Consider the organ transplant coverage . You need the $ $ way before the actual transplant . It can take months before you are 1st in line for an organ . As with all my other posts , we let underwriting determine the best choice for someone and then the coverage for the premium paid . BYE THE BEST you can qualify for folks ... . Reach out and I can work on getting you a copy of `` Stop Wasting Your Money on Insurance '' . - gravy
Each company defines this differently however when I hear of a Hybrid Term Life Insurance Policy this means to me that there is a Living Benefits type addition to the policy such as Critical Illness or Long-term Care . Critical Illness means if you have a heart attack , stroke or cancer you may have access to your death benefit . Note that the definitions or type of illness covered will vary between companies so be sure to look at the details . Long-term Care usually means Chronic Illness . If you are diagnosed by a qualified doctor , and you can not perform 2 of the 6 activities of daily living such as transferring , eating , toileting , dressing , etc. then you may have access to the death benefit . The Key is access BEFORE you die . I hope that helps . Be sure to get an illustration and details to the policy before just filling out an application .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
Life insurance covers you in the event of death . Critical illness covers you while you are alive , providing cash to care for the extra expenses involved with a critical illness . Some life insurance policies offer a critical illness rider that will pay a portion of the death benefit while you are still alive . if you are diagnosed with a critical illness
`` Need '' is not word I would apply to critical illness insurance in South Dakota , or any state . Critical illness is not an inevitable event , such as death may cause the need for life insurance , and it critical illness insurance does not contribute for years , such as long term care insurance does . It does help by paying a lump sum of money to someone stricken with a life threatening illness . With the prevalence of cancer and heart disease in our nation , that risk is higher than ever , and the treatments are more effective , so that critical illness insurance can indeed be a `` life saver '' of sorts .
This depends on the amount of money that you have saved to cover the costs associated with the immediate needs of a critical illness . If you have funds available to cover medical expenses of a critical illness , you may not need critical illness insurance . If you do not have the extra funds , than critical illness insurance can keep you from financial ruin .
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Critical Illness policies cover cancer , but may exclude low grade prostate cancer , or pay a reduced amount if the Gleason score is under 7 . Each critical illness policy is different , so you need to carefully read the listed conditions in your policy to see what stages of prostate cancer your critical illness insurance covers .
What is covered with critical illness insurance is spelled out in each policy , and differs from company to company . The basic critical illnesses are stroke , heart attack and some types of cancer . The cancer is usually the more serious kind , although some policies will pay a partial benefit for milder types of cancer . Some other critical illnesses that may be covered are organ transplant , Parkinson 's , Alzheimer 's , kidney failure , coronary bypass , blindness , deafness , or paralysis .
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Do I Need Private Disability Insurance If I Have A Group Plan Through Work ?
I personally dont think anyone should settle for a group plan through their employer . An individual contract is portable and will follow you to any future position you take . If you get sick or injured while on your group plan , and one day decide to change jobs , it will be much harder to get coverage . And unlike the coverage a group plan offers , private disability insurance benefits are tax fee ! With private DI , you can receive 70-80 % of your take home pay , as opposed to group plans that typically offer 42 % after taxes . Also , individual plans offer extra features like future increase options , partial disability or cost of living adjustments .
You may not need it if you have your own plan but the limit relies on the income adjustment for you . There is a certain percentage that the income must be adjusted to . Let Workers Comp cover you at the job for it is useful . Take out an individual disability plan that is all your own . Workers Comp is mandatory for any injury on job only while your disability policy can cover you both at work and home . I know the best companies for your situation .
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
Do you need private disability if I have group disability ? Depends . If you have group first , individual -LRB- private -RRB- disability will be limited as most plans only allow 60-70 % income replacement from all sources . Group usually covers 50-60 % of income . It will also most likely be taxable income so you have to decide how long you can get by on anywhere from 35-50 % of your total income . Where individual disability would step in is to fill that income gap . This is the reason I answered `` depends '' . It is what do you want , what the contracts actually say and what you can afford ? One thing to consider if you are new to the workplace is to get your individual disability first . You can protect 100 % of your income or even greater if your individual is in place before group .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Do you need private disability if I have group disability ? Depends . If you have group first , individual -LRB- private -RRB- disability will be limited as most plans only allow 60-70 % income replacement from all sources . Group usually covers 50-60 % of income . It will also most likely be taxable income so you have to decide how long you can get by on anywhere from 35-50 % of your total income . Where individual disability would step in is to fill that income gap . This is the reason I answered `` depends '' . It is what do you want , what the contracts actually say and what you can afford ? One thing to consider if you are new to the workplace is to get your individual disability first . You can protect 100 % of your income or even greater if your individual is in place before group .
I personally dont think anyone should settle for a group plan through their employer . An individual contract is portable and will follow you to any future position you take . If you get sick or injured while on your group plan , and one day decide to change jobs , it will be much harder to get coverage . And unlike the coverage a group plan offers , private disability insurance benefits are tax fee ! With private DI , you can receive 70-80 % of your take home pay , as opposed to group plans that typically offer 42 % after taxes . Also , individual plans offer extra features like future increase options , partial disability or cost of living adjustments .
If you are offered Disability Insurance through your work , yes , sign up for it ! You will most likely be paying a reasonable premium and have some income to pay your bills if you are unable to perform your job for an extended period of time due to illness or injury . If you are not offered Disability Insurance through your work , I recommend purchasing a long term disability insurance plan . One of the most common hardships I see in my job is people having to go on Social Security Disability due to MS , heart disease , cancer , or other health conditions . Not only do they face a pile of medical bills , they must wait many months without any income until they are approved for SSDI . With a private plan , they could be drawing their benefit much quicker , and the payments are greater than you get with SSDI . In fact , a private plan will supplement the SSDI to provide you with more spending money . Buying Disability Insurance is not cheap , but living without a paycheck for many months can be devastating . My vote would be , sign up for Disability Insurance . If you would like some assistance , I can help you find the most reasonable price from many companies .
Disability Insurance benefits can be paid through a group Disability Insurance policy , through a State Disability Insurance policy , through a private Disability Insurance policy , or through Social Security Disability . The benefits are the payment that you get if you are disabled longer than the elimination period of your policy . The benefits are paid regularly , as you would be paid a paycheck , if you were still working .
Yes , people can collect Social Security Disability benefits , and do not have to buy private Disability Insurance to get cash while being disabled . However , to get Social Security disability benefits you must generally be disabled for at least a year , and be unable to work -LRB- or be trained to work -RRB- at any job . Private Disability Insurance pays benefits more quickly . Also , with DI , if you have the `` own occupation '' feature , it pays if you can not work at your OWN job , not just ANY job . Finally , private disability insurance pays a higher benefit than Social Security DI . You can even supplement SSDI with DI .
Yes , private disability insurance does work . When a disability occurs , it pays you part of your income as designated in the policy . If you have disability insurance through work or receive Social Security disability insurance , it supplements that to give you a greater percent of your income . I have spoken with many people looking for life insurance who have developed MS , diabetes and other health conditions who are very grateful that they have private disability insurance income coming in .
Private Disability Insurance is Disability Insurance that is purchased privately vs being supplied by the insured person 's employer in a group policy . Persons who are self employed , or who do not have group Disability Insurance because their employer does not offer it , are most likely to buy private Disability Insurance .
You may have group disability insurance available to you through your employer , however , you will find generally find stronger coverage through an individual disability insurance plan . A disability is a sickness or injury which interferes in your ability to work and earn a living . In disability insurance , there 's 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST IMPORTANT factor to look at in a policy . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True own occupation is the best definition you can have . Gainful occupation is commonly seen in group policies and offers the least coverage . One of the drawbacks of group coverage is if your employment is terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual policy goes with you wherever you go and generally features stronger coverage and a better definition of disability -LRB- a true own occupation or modified own occupation definition -RRB- . You want to buy your disability insurance when you 're healthy - this type of coverage is much more in depth than life and health insurance . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may face an exclusion rider for the condition under a given policy or be postponed for the coverage until it 's resolved . Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance that has moving parts to policies . If you 're looking to apply for coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and have experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish and make the process as seemless as possible . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The federal government does not offer short term disability . Government workers do not have a directly sponsoredprogramthat they are automatically enrolled in . They can purchase private coverage . There are several private companies that allow government workers to purchase group policies and pay for them with a deduction initiated through the worker 's pay center . The federal government supports social security disability for private workers , but this program does not cover temporary disabilities . Your disability must be expected to last twelve months or longer , or result in death .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
You can get Short Term Disability coverage through your employer -LRB- in a group plan -RRB- or through an individual policy . It is much easier to find Short Term Disability Insurance in a group plan than it is to purchase it through a private agent , but you can get it either way .
Disability Insurance may cover maternity leave if it is provided as a Group Short Term Disability plan and if the insured has met the criteria for qualifying for a claim related to maternity and childbirth . Private Short Term Disability does not cover maternity leave , nor does Long Term Disability Insurance , whether purchased privately or provided in a group plan . However , complications of pregnancy and childbirth are usually covered .
Short Term Disability Insurance offered by an employer can cover maternity leave . There is a normally a requirement that you need to have worked for that employer some time before becoming pregnant in order to be eligible for this benefit . Private Short Term Disability Insurance , unfortunately , does not cover maternity leave . Long Term Disability , both group and private , will cover disabling complications of pregnancy or delivery .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can get up to a total of 80 % of your income through a combination of private Disability Insurance and Social Security Disability benefits . If the amount that you are due exceeds 80 % , part of the Social Security benefit will be subtracted from the private Disability benefit , or part of the private Disability benefit will be subtracted from the Social Security Disability benefit , so that the total you receive is 80 % of your original wages .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Does Renters Insurance Cost A Year ?
Renters Insurance costs vary depending on the location , type of dwelling and amount of property coverage . The cost of renters insurance will also vary depending on the insurance carrier you choose to go with . I know for my Farmers agency , renters insurance can be as little as $ 10 a month .
The pricing for renters insurance is based upon the limit for liability coverage that you desire and the amount of personal property that you want covered . Obviously , these vary with every customer . Recently I saw an ad on TV stating that their renters policies were $ 8 per monthor something like that . In my agency the average is about $ 10 but that doesnt mean that will be appropriate for you . Consult with an agent , the cost of suffering a loss and not having a policy is much greater than the premium .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
How much is the average renter 's insurance premium ? Not much ! Renter 's insurance typically is inexpensive and costs about $ 100 - $ 240 per year , depending on where you live and how much contentcoverageyou need . Of course , there are many other variables including other types of insurance you have with the carrier , your credit and past claims history .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best way to think about it is , to imagine that your unit has been gutted by a fire . You have lost everything that you own . How much money will you want ? If you take pictures of your unit you will know what you had . If you estimated the replacement cost for each item , you would know how much you would want . I suggest that number guide you in selecting a renters policy . If a process server appears at your door with a lawsuit , how much back up do you want ? I suggest you take as much liability coverage as the insurance company offers .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Renters insurance can usually be purchased from around $ 50 - $ 250 per year . The total cost of renters insurance is based on a variety of factors , the largest of which is how much contents coverage is requested to be insured . Be sure that the renters insurance that you purchase has replacement cost on the policy .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Locksmith ?
If you lost your keys , you 're probably out of luck since most insurers do n't pay for replacement keys in that situation . However , if your locks were damaged during a theft or break-in , or the keys were stolen , many homeowner 's policies will pay for their replacement . It 's possible a deductible may not apply since it clearly is in your and the insurance company 's best interest to replace your locks . An experienced broker will shed additional light and information on this topic .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
Home Insurance may cover appliances in home ; there are 2 types of appliances , those that are fitted and those that are free standing . Fitted appliances constitute part of the Dwelling Coverage on the home insurance policy , whereas , free standing appliances may be covered under the Personal Property Coverage on the home insurance policy . The perils covered under a home insurance policy must be reviewed regarding the damage to the appliances . For example , Fire , Smoke , Lightning & Water damage may be covered on the policy which would also carry forward to the appliances . Regarding free standing appliances , the policy must afford coverage for Personal Property . If this question was intended for the reason of upkeep and maintenance of appliances , home insurance policies are not intended to repair or replace appliances due to maintenance and/or breakdown . Home insurance is intended for sudden and accidental losses which could cause financial hardship to the homeowner . If you wish to cover your appliances , you may wish topurchase a Home Warranty Contract from a small handful of carriers who offer a maintenance contract ; in this case , you will pay an annual premium as well as a Service Charge for each call when a repair company is dispatched to take care of a covered maintenance situation . If your question was indeed regarding perils covered on a homeowners policy , you may wish to contact your local agent and review the coverage on your policy or WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your coverage for you at no charge .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Homeowners Insurance and Title Insurance are not the same . Title insurance is insurance to make sure the title of the home is clean . For example you are purchasing a home from Mr. Doe . The title company is to make sure all information is accurate such as who is the seller , boundaries are correct and so on . If you purchased the home from Mr. Doe and you find out later there also was a MS. Doe who says I never gave permission to sell the home now there is a problem and title insurance would step in to cover this situation . Homeowners insurance is what you purchase to cover your actual dwelling and property , liability etc. . . for a potential loss .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
All homeowners policies cover claims that result in the damage or destruction of covered property do to accidents . Your home policy does cover the damage to your home and personal property due to your furnace . But remember , the claim will not cover the repair or replacement of the furnace itself . Home insurance is not a repair and maintenance insurance . It only covers damage to your property as the result of an accident and will not cover the replacement or repair of items in your home . If you have any other questions about this subject please feel free to call me .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover some part-time home health services such as physical therapy , skilled nursing care , speech-language pathology servcies , etc. . Medicare does not pay for 24 hour home health care however , nor meals delivered to your home , personal care , and homemaker services . Please note , there are a number of conditions that must be met for Medicare to cover your home health care . If you need more than part-time/intermittent home care , Medicare will not cover the expenses . Home health care is very expensive and you can deplete your savings paying for it . For someone wanting 24-hour home health care to be covered by their insurance , they should look into securing a long-term care insurance policy . While long-term care can be an expensive type of insurance to have , you 're paying pennies on the dollar if you needed to make a claim on the coverage . There 's many moving parts to long-term care insurance . If you 're looking to secure this type of coverage , it 's most helpful to consult with an experienced broker to help build a policy that will best serve your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Most Home Insurance policies will only cover a vacant or unoccupied home for a short time -LRB- 60 or 90 days -RRB- before they impose coverage limitations . I have seen policies with much higher deductible for `` vacant '' homes . Most wo n't cover burst plumbing or theft/vandalism if the house is ruled vacant at the time of a claim . If you have a vacation home , most seasonal home policies understand that the house will be unoccupied for large periods of time , and address that in their coverage terms . There are vacant home policies that are designed for unoccupied homes . If your home is for sale , or has been unoccupied for a long periodic time I suggest you talk to an insurance agent about getting a vacant home policy . Foremost Insurance and Vacant Express are two companies that specialize in vacant home coverage .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
Keep in mind that if one insurance company will not insure your home that does not necessarily mean that your home is uninsurable . And to take it a step farther ... . just because your home does not qualify for insurance with the standard markets , this does n't mean that it will not qualify for a home with an excess / surplus lines carrier like Lloyd 's . Contacting the insurance department is a good idea as I know that PA has the `` Fair Plan '' and you can go to : WEBSITELINK for some additional info because your state might have a similar site to access . -- @MooneyInsurance
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
Homeowners insurance is designed to cover your home and possessions if they are damaged in a covered loss or stolen . It also protects you in a lawsuit . It is totally different than a home warranty . A home warranty just covers you for undisclosed problems when you purchase a home . It does not cover your belongings , structure damage caused by fire , wind or other perils , liability , or theft .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Are The Coverage Characteristics Of Life Insurance ?
The coverage characteristics of life insurance are relatively simple . Life insurance is meant to replace the income , the debt or the financial need of a business partner , spouse or loved one that would be in need in case of your death . A person dependent upon your income can be compensated , such as a child or spouse . An institution can have a debt repaid , such as a bank , mortgage company or credit union . A business that would suffer financially from the death of a partner or key employee . Life insurance is the most affordable way to cover these financial losses due to an unexpected or sudden death . We all die someday , do n't leave a big financial mess behind for those that depend on you .
All life insurance falls into one of two categories of coverage . Each category has certain characteristics that make it more suitable for certain needs . Term life insurance is for temporary protection needs . If the insured dies during the term period , the insurer pays a death benefit . If the insured survives the coverage period , coverage ends . Permanent or cash value life insurance is for permanent protection needs lasting one 's lifetime . It provides coverage for life and , provided the premiums are paid and the policy does not lapse , a death benefit will always be paid . Cash values build over time and can be withdrawn or borrowed if needed . Term usually expires before you do while permanent is designed to last for your lifetime .
A qualified annuity will have the tax characteristics of the particular type of plan it is -LRB- IRA , Roth IRA etc. -RRB- . A non qualified annuity has it 's own tax characteristics . Many of those characteristics are similar to qualified plans , but there are some that are unique to non qualified annuities . - There is no maximum annual contribution . You can invest as much as you would like into a non qualified annuity - Unlike in a qualified plan , the IRS does not force you to start taking withdrawals at age 591/2 or at any age - If you annuitize , your tax burden will be spread out over the withdrawal period . Instead of being taxed as earnings first , each payment will be taxed as being made up of both some earnings and some return of basis . This tax exclusion ratio is calculated at the time you annuitize .
You can expect your insurance to go up for a variety of reasons . perhaps the most common is the fact the a carrier has filed and is acting upon a rate increase in your state . While individual risk characteristics of your household such as number of drivers , age of drivers , driving experience and vehicle characteristics can influence the price , insurers are usually operating with the law of large numbers in the basis for taking rate changes . If you look at the book of business that an insurer has you will see that it is made up of exposures that are in aggregate different form one state to the next . For example in areas where there is a propensity for flood then insurers will want a higher comprehensive premium then in states where this is not a widespread issue . So insurers , if they are national in scope are operating within the jurisdiction of 50 different insurance departments . Some jurisdiction allow pricing decisions to be made primarily by the carriers . Other states require prior approval of changes to rate levels . As as costs go up for fixing people -LRB- bodily injury -RRB- or fixing cars -LRB- property damage -RRB- , then carriers file rate changes in the various states . So part of the answer has to be that you will see rate increase often without any change to your own circumstances .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
All life insurance falls into one of two categories of coverage . Each category has certain characteristics that make it more suitable for certain needs . Term life insurance is for temporary protection needs . If the insured dies during the term period , the insurer pays a death benefit . If the insured survives the coverage period , coverage ends . Permanent or cash value life insurance is for permanent protection needs lasting one 's lifetime . It provides coverage for life and , provided the premiums are paid and the policy does not lapse , a death benefit will always be paid . Cash values build over time and can be withdrawn or borrowed if needed . Term usually expires before you do while permanent is designed to last for your lifetime .
The question is a little vague . If you are asking what do I need to get a price for homeowners insurance , then you will need several pieces of information . You will need to know the year the home was built , the square footage of the home , the physical characteristics of the home and your personal information . If you are asking about coverage , call a local agent and they can help you decide what policy and endorsements are right for you .
Some coverage characteristics of Disability Insurance that are beneficial to the insured are as follows : 1 -RRB- Guaranteed renewable or guaranteed non-cancellable ; 2 -RRB- Own occupation feature ; 3 -RRB- Coverage to age 65 ; 4 -RRB- Elimination period that fits with how long you could afford to live without your paycheck ; 5 -RRB- Residual disability feature ; 6 -RRB- Cost of Living increase ; 7 -RRB- Future benefit increases guaranteed ; and 8 -RRB- Choice of how what % of your income you want to replace .
The basic types of life insurance are term , whole life and universal life . There are several variations of each type available , much to numerous to mention here . Here are the basic characteristics : Term insurance - covers you for a specified term -LRB- 10 , 20 , 30 years -RRB- and then the rate increases until the policy expires at a given age . Typical 80 or 85 . Very inexpensive initially , but renewals in later years could be cost prohibitive . Whole life - coverage for the whole of your life . Premiums usually level and guaranteed . This type of policy usually has a build up of cash value , that in some cases in could be quite significant . Universal Life is essentially an unbundled whole life . Subject to minimums and maximums you choose the premium you pay and how the cash value is invested . Flexibility is a double edged sword since this type of policy needs to be managed . Since there are some many options available , you will need help choosing . An independent life insurance broker , who represents several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
No , you do n't have to lose coverage , but a characteristic of universal life allows for flexible premiums ; you choose what you want to pay . At the time of purchase , your agent must have set premium at the level that the illustration shows zero at age 75 . Most likely , you will only need to adjust your amount of premium up , but you must get a current illustration to know how much is needed to keep coverage in force . It will certainly take some upward adjustment of premium , since you reached a zero value at your present premium level .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
The price of life insurance for a 40 year old depends on the health , tobacco use , weight , and gender of the applicant , in addition to how much life insurance is purchased and what type of policy is bought . Short term policies cost much less than permanent policies . Policies for smokers usually cost at least double the rate of policies for nonsmokers . Coverage for those with serious health conditions can cost 10 times or more of the premium for a 40 year old with perfect health . To get an estimate of a life insurance quote for a 40 year old with your characteristics , you can run a quote on an website advertising `` instant life insurance quotes '' . You can input different amounts and different types of policies to see how rates differ for different scenarios .
Homeowners Insurance consists of Dwelling Coverage -LRB- Home -RRB- , Other Structures , Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- , Loss of Use and Personal Liability Coverage . To answer the question , the Dwelling Coverage should be sufficient to rebuild the home from the ground up following a covered total loss ; this would be a total reconstruction estimate to rebuild the home . Most insurance carriers have a method of calculating the replacement cost of a dwelling based on the characteristics input when you request the initial quotation ; in most cases , this is a safe number to properly insure the home . Regarding Personal Liability Insurance , it is a good idea to purchase the maximum limit available since this coverage is very inexpensive and is not subject to any deductible . Most carriers offer a maximum limit of $ 500,000 for Personal Liability . If in the process of purchasing the necessary coverage , the consumer is attempting to generate a lower premium charge , it would be a good idea to accept a high deductible which will prove to offer a much lower premium with relatively low risk to the insured . There is a system available to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States . An exemplary online experience for all with the ability to select different options and adjust your home insurance quote as necessary . WEBSITELINK
Some coverage characteristics of Disability Insurance are : 1 -RRB- Length of coverage . Can be years to until retirement , for Long Term Disability Insurance . 2 -RRB- Elimination period . The time you must be disabled before benefits are collected . 3 -RRB- Percent of income replaced . 4 -RRB- Features such as whether the policy will pay if you can not perform your own occupation , if you are partially disabled , etc. 5 -RRB- Renewability , opportunities to increase coverage in the future , etc. .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
MEC is a Modified Endowment Contract . It is a life insurance policy that meets the IRS definition of life insurance but fails a specific premium test -LRB- the seven pay test -RRB- meant to limit using life insurance as a tax sheltered investment vehicle and was established in a tax change in 1988 -LRB- TAMRA -RRB- . MEC policies still retain income tax-free death benefit characteristic . But , it changes the favorable tax treatment of cash value distributions normally associated with life insurance to tax treatment normally associated with annuities . Owners of a MEC would not likely plan to take cash from the policy . Typically , MECs created on purpose are single premium policies and used in estate planning techniques . For example , instead of a large single premium annuity which would result in income tax payable on the death benefit proceeds , some high net worth individuals may elect to fund a single premium life insurance policy which provides an income tax-free death benefit .
There are two parts to this answer . The price is largely determined by the actuaries of an insurance company . The price represents the claims experience of the company in your area with homes that are of similar construction and value . The other side of the equation are the underwriters of the insurance company who look at individual characteristics to determine of the home meets the company standards . These two determine whether a home will be underwritten and at what price .
Your insurance company will give you what you agree to take . Generally speaking they will use a pricing service such as Kelleys Blue Book or Edmunds to establish a price for a car with your mileage and general characteristics . You can negotiate with the insurance company if you feel that the price is not accurate . In those negotiations you can not rely upon modifications that you have made to the vehicle .
There are several reasons auto insurance goes up ... Unfortunately some of those reasons may have absolutely nothing to do with you . Remember , all insurance is is a big pool of money . Policy holders are grouped together and pay premiums into the pool . When a claim happens , money is pulled out of the pool . If too much money is pulled out , then more money has to be put in so premiums go up ... I know this is a very simplistic explanation and the realty is much more complex , but it is a fact that if a bunch of other people in your `` pool '' -LRB- your state or region -RRB- experience a lot of acidents or other losses - the rates for everyone in that `` pool '' are going up no matter if you have had an accicent , ticket or anything else . Of course , there are individual reasons why you premiums coud be going up based on your driving record , personal characteristics , etc. . Give your agent a call and they should be able to break your premium down and explain what part of an increase pertains to you specifically and what part is a rate increase by the carrier .
Without knowing more about you , it is impossible to know whether you should get Term Life Insurance . The type of life insurance you should get , or whether you should get life insurance at all , is best determined in a consultation with an experienced agent who can help fit the product to your needs and budget . This can be done in person , over the phone , or even by email . But one size does not necessarily fit all , and talking over your situation with someone who can help you sort through the thousands of products can be extremely helpful . Generally speaking , though , there are two main characteristics of someone who should buy Term Life : they needa lot of coverage for the least possible cost now , and they will not need as much -LRB- or any -RRB- life insurance in the distant future .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Would Health Insurance Cover Therapy ?
Does Health Insurance Cover Therapy ? It depends on the type of therapy . Most quality group plans will cover physical , physiological or other types of therapy . If you have an individual health plan pre-2014 I would check your benefit details , because many of the old policies did not cover therapy . Post-2014 plans tend to have stronger coverage . Request your summary of benefits and Coverage to see how the specific therapy treatment is covered under your benefits . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Does Health Insurance Cover Therapy ? It depends on the type of therapy . Most quality group plans will cover physical , physiological or other types of therapy . If you have an individual health plan pre-2014 I would check your benefit details , because many of the old policies did not cover therapy . Post-2014 plans tend to have stronger coverage . Request your summary of benefits and Coverage to see how the specific therapy treatment is covered under your benefits . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
Physican therapy is covered under Medicare Part B , but there are cap limits for therapy services - $ 1,920 for physical therapy -LRB- cap for services combined with speech-language therapy -RRB- . If the services are deemed medically necessary -LRB- and documented -RRB- by your therapist , you would not be responsible for costs above the $ 1,920 cap.If you 're getting physical therapy services that are not medically necessary , then Medicare will not pay for the services . Medicare would be paying for approximately 80 % of the costs and you would be responsible for the other 20 % , after the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay the Part B deductible and the 20 % costs for physical therapy services .
Yes . Medicare Part B does provide coverage for physical therapy , but there are cap limits for therapy services - $ 1,920 for physical therapy -LRB- cap for services combined with speech-language therapy -RRB- . If the services are deemed medically necessary -LRB- and documented -RRB- by your therapist , you would not be responsible for costs above the $ 1,920 cap . If you 're getting physical therapy services that are not medically necessary , then Medicare will not pay for the services . Medicare would be paying for approximately 80 % of the costs and you would be responsible for the other 20 % , after the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay the Part B deductible and the 20 % costs for physical therapy services .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
MediGap Plan F policies are designed to pick up the 20 % that Medicare does n't cover in exchange for a monthly premium . The plans are standardized and are required to cover all of the approved services covered by Medicare Parts A & B. Physical Therapy is considered an outpatient rehabilitative service . This category is a Medicare covered benefit which includes Occupational Therapy , Physical Therapy , Speech and Language Therapy .
Medicare does indeed cover physical therapy , occupational therapy and speech therapy . Medicare does impose limits on how much they will pay . Apparently at some point they think you have had enough and need to suck it up . In 2013 the limits are $ 1900 for physical and speech therapy combined . OT limits are $ 1900 . I told my doctor I broke my leg in two places . He told me to quit going to those places . Ba-da-bing
According to the 2014 Medicare and You handbook distributed by CMS , physical therapy is a limited Medicare approved item . Medicare covers an evaluation and treatment for any injury or disease that changes your ability to function -LRB- provided a doctor approves your need for physical therapy -RRB- . There may be a limit on the amount Medicare will pay for physical therapy services in a single year . Most Medigap Plans will pay the remaining 20 % that Original Medicare does not pay for Medicare approved physical therapy .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for home IV therapy . When infusions are done in the hospital or in a skilled nursing facility , Medicare picks up the payment for infusion therapy . However , it is has not extended that benefit to home IV therapy , even though the costs are much less than what is entailed when receiving IV therapy in a hospital or nursing home .
Medicare does cover medically necessary occupational therapy , within certain limits . In 2014 , after you have paid your Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 -RRB- , Medicare will then cover 80 % of charges for occupational therapy , up to an annual limit of $ 1920 . If your occupational thearpy exceeds this annual limit , you can request additional coverage from Medicare once your therapy costs exceed $ 3700 for the calendar year .
There are three levels of Nursing Care , Skilled , Intermediate , and Custodial . Skilled Nursing care requires that you need the services of a licensed professional and that your health can improve by utilizing those services . For example , physical therapy , occupational therapy , and speech therapy would fall under those categories . Custodial Care means that you are not going to improve . You just need the assistance of others to perform certain activities of daily living . Medicare only pays for Skilled Nursing and is limited to 100 days .
Medicare can pay for nursing care at home under certain conditions . 1 -RRB- The patient must require only intermittent -LRB- part time -RRB- skilled care . If you need 24 hours skilled nursing care , Medicare will not cover those services provided in your home . 2 -RRB- You must be ordered to receive speech therapy , physical therapy , or occupational therapy . 3 -RRB- You must be certified as homebound . 4 -RRB- All the services must be documented as needed and provided by Medicare providers .
Outpatient Mental Health Care is a covered benefit under Medicare Part B . There is a 20 % co-insurance for most outpatient mental health services . If you are a member of a Medicare Advantage Plan , you plan may cover that service with a simple co-pay . You have the option to have a individual therapy visit or group therapy visit .
That would depend on what type of therapy you need , and which insurance policy you have . All health plans written since January 1 , 2014 must cover traditional physical and mental therapies , though different companies may have a different limit on the number of visits that are covered . To find the best plan for your personal situation , it is best to speak with a licensed , independent agent that works with most , if not all , the insurance companies in your area .
No , acupuncture is not a medically approved expense by Medicare . You can not claim acupuncture on Medicare because the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- has classified it as an Alternative Therapy , and Medicare will not pay for Alternative Therapy . They only reimburse therapies that they feel have been proven effective by scientific standards .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
If prescribed as reasonably and medically necessary , Medicare covers home health care in the following ways : 1 . Skilled nursing care 2 . Physical therapy , occupational therapy , and speech-language pathology services 3 . Medical social services 4 . Medical supplies It will not cover 24 hour per day care or homemaker or personal care services , if those services are the only care needed and not necessary for one 's plan of care .
When someone has been prescribed medially necessary skilled nursing , here is what is covered -LRB- when provided by a Medicare approved provider -RRB- : 1 . Semi-private Room -LRB- a room you share with other patients -RRB- 2 . Meals 3 . Skilled Nursing Care 4 . Physical Therapy * 4 . Occupational Therapy * 5 . Speech-Language Pathology Services * 6 . Medical Social Services 7 . Medications 8 . Medical Supplies and Equipment Used in Facility 9 . Ambulance Transportation -LRB- when other transportation endangers health -RRB- to the nearest supplier of needed services that arent available at the SNF 10 . Dietary Counseling * If prescribed to meet your health goals
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Erectile Dysfunction Medications ?
Erectile dysfunction medications such as Viagra and Cialis are not covered by Medicare -LRB- not under Medicare Part D Drug Plans or any other Medicare plan -RRB- . This coverage was discontinued by Medicare in 2006 . Medicare will cover penile vacuum pumps , or penile inflation devices if the pumps are ineffective , for some cases of erectile dysfunction .
Medicare does not pay for Viagra , Cialis , Levitra or other erectile dysfunction drugs . They are not covered in Part B Medicare and excluded by Part D Medicare Drug Plans . The coverage ended in 2006 , when Congress determined them `` lifestyle '' drugs instead of medically necessary drugs . Since then , penile vacuum pumps , or , if those are ineffective , implanted penile inflation devices , are the only treatments for erectile dysfunction that are covered by Medicare .
Erectile dysfunction medications such as Viagra and Cialis are not covered by Medicare -LRB- not under Medicare Part D Drug Plans or any other Medicare plan -RRB- . This coverage was discontinued by Medicare in 2006 . Medicare will cover penile vacuum pumps , or penile inflation devices if the pumps are ineffective , for some cases of erectile dysfunction .
No , Medicare does not pay for Cialis or other erectile dysfunction drugs . Medicare Part B will not cover Cialis , nor will Medicare prescription plans -LRB- Medicare Part D -RRB- . Sometimes drug discount cards offered through other entities will pay a discount for the purchase of erectile dysfunction drugs such as Cialis , Levitra , or Viagra .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not cover Cialis for BPH -LRB- benign prostatic hyperplasia -RRB- . The FDA approved Cialis for the treatment of enlarged prostate symptoms in 2011 . However , Medicare does not cover Cialis for BPH , erectile dysfunction , or other medical conditions , either through Part B or through Part D prescription drug plans .
No , Medicare does not pay for Viagra in Medicare Part B or Part D. Erectile dysfunction drugs such as Viagra or Levitra are not considered medically necessary by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , and thus are not covered by Medicare . There are some drug discount plans that will provide discount on those drugs , but not through Medicare plans .
Medicare does cover vacuum erection systems -LRB- VES -RRB- , believe it or not , if you have a medical condition . These pumps are recognized as a treatment device for erectile dysfunction . This may change in the future though as there have been reports in the media that Medicare may consider changing the coverage parameters for this type of item or possibly not cover it at all . I would recommend checking with Medicare before buying one if you want to see if it 'll be covered . You can always pay for it out-of-pocket though .
Medicare Part D does not cover Viagra or other medications for ED -LRB- erectile dysfunction -RRB- . I had a client that was prescribed Cialis , but not for ED ... it was prescribed for a different medical reason . So his doctor wrote a note explaining the reason for the prescription and the client was able to get a drug exception . However , since the medication was not on the formulary , it was Tier 5 - so the client still had to pay 33 % of the cost .
No , Medicare does not cover Cialis or other erectile dysfunction drugs , either through traditional Medicare or through Part D Medicare prescription drug coverage . It is also not covered by Medicare Advantage Plans . Drug discount cards offered through private companies is one way to possibly get a discount on ED drugs .
Unfortunately , Viagra is not covered by Medicare Part D , nor are any or the other erectile dysfunction drugs such as Cialis or Levitra . Some drug discount cards will cover Viagra and other ED drugs , but Medicare does not cover over the counter or prescription ED drugs through any of its plans .
As long as the physician writing your prescribing deems your need to be medically necessary , most insurance companies will cover this medication . Several other erectile dysfunction drugs are also covered by most plans , as are vacuum devices and implants , as long as they are medically necessary , something that would normally be the result of a disease or side effect of surgery .
No , the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid services does not consider ED -LRB- Erectile Dysfunction -RRB- drugs as medically necessary so they are not covered . I recommend locating a drug discount plan that will provide a discount on those drugs.Possibly your physician/urologist/pharmacist could have information on discounts available for this type of drug .
Cialis coverage depends upon the prescription drug formulary used by a specific health insurance carrier and the medical necessity for that specific drug . Having lost a family member to prostate cancer I sympathize with your situation . Unfortunately , there has been a fair amount of abuse of using the diagnosis of BPH as a screen to really get it covered for use for its effects on erectile dysfunction , that 's one problem you are faced with . Secondly , Cialis does have a number of side effects that can be problematic for men with other health issues . There are other treatments for BPH that do n't have as many side effects so these are probably preferred by your insurance carrier . This is an issue where coverage for Cialis can vary greatly from insurance carrier to insurance carrier . It may also be a case where your physician has not made the case for medical necessity for your particular condition . It is not uncommon to have an initial prescription request declined in these dual use drug scenarios and it may require more extensive communication and submission of medical records by your physician to your insurance carrier 's pharmacy management unit to request approval . But certainly a very strong case of medical necessity will have to be made to get a prescription for Cialis approved . Let 's face it , they 're not advertising it for it 's effects on BPH , they 're advertising it so 71 year old can act like a 21 year old again .
Cialis is not covered by Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage . All ED drugs -LRB- Levitra , Cialis , Viagra , etc -RRB- are excluded from Medicare drug formularies . Some organizations and companies offer drug discount cards that can be used to help cut the costs of purchasing erectile dysfunction drugs such as Cialis .
Viagra and other erectile dysfunction drugs are not covered by Medicare Part D . You can search for discounts on Viagra by entering the words , `` Viagra coupon '' , `` Viagra discount '' , or `` Viagra promotion '' in the search engine of your choice . Or contact your pharmacy to see if they offer generics , or drug discounts for Viagra .
Yes , you can almost always get life insurance while having lupus . If your lupus is severe enough to cause kidney damage , anemia , pleurisy , pericarditis , or brain dysfunction , you will most likely need to take a simplified or guaranteed issue policy . If it is mild , you can get medically underwritten life insurance at reasonable rates .
I actually just got someone who is a paraplegic a very good rate on life insurance . One big plus was that he lived with his family , drove his own vehicle to work , and has many coworkers at the office . One big underwriting concern is the ability to vacate the premises in case of an emergency . Wheelchair-bound people who live by themselves are very tough to underwrite for that exact fear . Other issues include complications and organ dysfunction due to lack of mobility . By and large you can be eligible for coverage , but it requires some very careful prequalification to make sure all the quote information is thorough and accurate , and that the carriers fully understand how you are managing all medical and lifestyle issues .
You use Long Term Care Insurance benefits if/when you experience the triggers that allow the countdown of the elimination period to begin , and finally , the benefit to be paid . The triggers will be the loss of the ability to do at least two ADL 's -LRB- activities of daily living -RRB- without personal assistance , and with the expectation that this condition will remain for at least 90 days . Another trigger than prompts usage of Long Term Care benefits is cognitive dysfunction that interferes with daily living .
That is a great question ! Let 's assume for a second that Mr. Trump -LRB- or someone from his party -RRB- becomes our next President . We all know that his party was never much in favor of Obamacare , -LRB- even though many , like Ted Cruz , have it -RRB- and would like to see it thrown out . Doing so , however poses a couple of challenges . The first is that there are millions of voters who received health insurance for the first time because of the Act . These folks might not take kindly to threats of removing the care they are finally being able to get . Unless there is a well thought out plan to allow them to keep their newly-gained insurance and health care services , -LRB- which to my knowledge no candidate had laid out , or even suggested exists -RRB- , there is a fair chance they vote against the party that suggests taking that care away . The second is that their main points of attack have been upheld by two separate Supreme Court rulings . That would require some serious rewriting of the Act to enable changes to pass Congress , and at this juncture , it appears that Congress , and the party of Mr. Trump , are so dysfunctional that they could n't pass go , let alone a finely crafted bill that would require a majority on one page . That said , I certainly believe that there will be attempts to change how it 's funded -LRB- though it has actually saved money overall , and lowered costs -RRB- because we seem to have a Government that favors those who have a lot already , at the expense of those with little . Whether those attempts pass will be decided by how the Congress is made up after the election . The President alone can not pass anything on his own , or make changes , so it will be up to Congress to decide . If this is a concern for you , I would highly advise that you take the opportunity to let your voice be heard , and speak with your vote . If you do not exercise your right to speak when it is your chance , you give away your right to complain about it later , you know ? Great question , thank you for asking it !
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Why Has Homeowners Insurance Gone Up ?
Homeowner 's insurance premiums have gone up because the average coverage on homes has increased over the years . Not only are dwelling amounts increasing , but the personal property and other parts of the policy have higher amounts . Liability costs and medical cost are higher than they were in the past and that has increased costs . And of course , national disasters -LRB- such as the recent tornadoes in Oklahoma -RRB- continue to cost billions of dollars to insurers .
There could be several reasons why your homeowners insurance has gone up . One could be the amount of coverage has increased due to rising costs of construction . One could be your home is getting older . If you had a newer home you were afforded discounts that may be diminishing . Did you have a claim would be another reason . Or it just could be losses in your area have increased and this effects the whole . I would review your policy with your agent to make sure you are maximizing all available discounts .
Is Whole life insurance worth buying ? Well the answer is going to vary by the individual as people see worth differently . To me a decades old owner of whole life , all I can do is tell you why I purchased whole life . I liked the idea of owning the policy with a set price that can not be changed . I liked the terms of ownership did n't or could n't be changed over time . I like the steady boring returns to cash values that these policies produced . While my real estate , stock market and other investments have gone up and down , in many cases very dramatically , my boring whole life has done what it said it would . My whole life has NEVER gone backwards in value , it grows in good markets and bad ones . Is whole life the only thing you should purchase , well no . A good portfolio is a diverse portfolio . Whole life should be a part of it , but not all of it . Owning a whole life allows you to take risks elsewhere as you have a safety net .
My advice is to keep your Term policy until the time when premiums go up -LRB- usually , at the end of the term -RRB- . The exception would be if your health improved , you lost a lot of weight , quit smoking , or something else that would allow you to get a better rate on a new policy . Once the rate jumps up and goes into annually renewable term , the price gets so high that it is unsustainable for long . Some situations that might prompt you to keep it for a while is if you are terminally ill or have a very short need for which buying a new policy would be more of a hassle than it is worth . It is far better to convert the policy before the price jumps up and the conversion privilege ends . You will get a lot more for your money to convert it to permanent than pay the annually renewable rates . As far as dropping your Term policy when the need ends , one need usually replaces another , and when that good rate is gone , it is gone . You will be surprised at how much more it will cost you to get that coverage back just due to being older . If you have been diagnosed with a serious health problem in the meantime -LRB- and is n't that why a lot of people seek life insurance , because they have just been faced with their own mortality -RRB- , you may not be able to get a new Term policy at all . So I would give it a lot of thought before dropping any Term policy unless it is to get a better policy at a lower rate , or to switch it to something permanent .
Harry Crosby , a long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCI -RRB- agent , coach and trainer , has one of the best answers to this question that I know of . It 's called `` The Two Mistakes '' . In the interest of space , I have edited his take on this important question : There are really only two mistakes you can make with long-term care insurance . Mistake number one : You get one of these plans . It doesnt matter which one . You buy a plan , pay every year , live a long happy and healthy life , die in your sleep with a smile on your face and the money you paid in is gone . Right . The money you paid in is gone . Had you known that this would be the case , you would never have purchased a long-term carepolicy . Mistake number two : You stay self-insured , which is what you are doing right now . Then you -LRB- and possibly your spouse -RRB- need care . Not only do you pay for it yourself out-of-pocket , but the rest of the burden is placed on your family . Lets look at the two mistakes . Mistake number one is that you get this plan , and your premium is about $ 2,500 a year . You live another 30 years , and at age 85 you die in your sleep with a smile on your face never needing a day of care and thus never getting a dime out of the policy . You get to the pearly gates , they look at your file , and they laugh at you because you made a $ 75,000 mistake for having this policy and never needed it . By the way , that amount is less than one year of facility care in todays dollars . Now , mistake number two . You decide to not get this policy and pay the premium . Twenty years from now , when you are 75 , you need care for just two years . You pay for the care out-of-pocket . Based on past trends , the average cost of future care will be about $ 350,000 . If you have to make a mistake , which mistake has the least impact on your family : the first one or the second one ? That is why top financial advisors and the federal and state government encourage people like you and I to look into LTCI . It is just common sense .
What do you want it for and what to protect ? Is it for a temporary need , like until the mortgage is paid off , or the kids through school ? Or for your spouse at your death ? Term insurance can be bought for twenty or even thirty years , it is fairly low cost , but when its gone its gone . Permanent life will last to your death , and the premiums will not go up , it accumulates cash value , and can be borrowed against . If you stop paying for your term , it will be gone in 30 days , but with permanent , if you miss a payment , it can be paid from your accumulated value . Permanent can be either whole life or universal life . Universal can be tied to some stock index , and go up a bit more than whole , but may also drop to a certain point . How much risk do you want ? Your decision . Of course with indexed universal , there are some protections at the bottom end , which cost you some of the top end performance . Thank you . GARY LANE .
That 's a great question ! Let 's answer it this way : How would you be financially if you purchase your home , take out a big mortgage to pay for it , buy new furniture and appliances to fill the house , get all of your belongings in it , and then it catches fire and is gone ? Would you be able to start from scratch and repay the mortgage ? Or how about if a visitor fell down some steps in your home , and had to be hospitalized . Would you be able to pay the bills and possible law suit damages that you are liable for ? These are two really good reasons why homeowners is important , and most lenders will not sign off on your mortgage unless their investment is protected somehow . I hope that helps you decide to insure your home . Thank you for asking !
The death benefit is usually income tax free to the beneficiary . The reason why I say usually is because there are a few circumstances where the benefit would be taxable . If the death benefit is paid out in installment payments and is gaining interest , the beneficiary would have to pay taxes on the interest earned . The beneficiary of a life insurance policy receives a lump sum of money from the insurance company that is not included as income . The applicant does not pay any taxes on their premium payments as well . Life insurance also skips probate court . Probate court is the court that deals with distribution of assets after one passes . Most individuals have their assets tied up in probate from six months to over two years . Walt Disney passed away in 1966 his estate is still in probate . Nobody has access to the individuals estate until it has gone through the probate court . Life insurance bypasses the probate process and goes to the beneficiary income tax free in most cases .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
The cash surrender value is the portion of your insurance that you have built up your own money in . Whole-life insurance by design is really like a reducing term policy with a cash account that builds guaranteed cash value as you get further and further into the policy years . All whole-life policies have a maturity date where your cash has built up to the point that you are completely self insured and the actual insured portion -LRB- the part the insurance company has at risk -RRB- has gone to zero . You can use your cash value while you are living through policy loans , cash surrenders , or using it to buy reduced paid up insurance .
Homeowner 's insurance premiums have gone up because the average coverage on homes has increased over the years . Not only are dwelling amounts increasing , but the personal property and other parts of the policy have higher amounts . Liability costs and medical cost are higher than they were in the past and that has increased costs . And of course , national disasters -LRB- such as the recent tornadoes in Oklahoma -RRB- continue to cost billions of dollars to insurers .
Another way to think about this question is , `` How much woulda disabling event cost you without coverage ? '' Considering Brandon 's well-thought out response to you , also thinking about the question from the darker side makes many of us uneasy inside though . -LSB- I do n't like to think something like that can happen , but it does . -RSB- From personal experience , I can tell you that disability insurance and critical illness insurance has a very real place in anyone 's planning who has a paycheck and depends on that paycheck for their living . Period . I am now 42 years old and at the age of 27 I delivered a very healthy baby girl - went home from the hospital after 4 days like normaland on the 5th day had a pulmonary embolism that locked up both of my lungs almost to the point of death . So instead of being gone from my job for 8 weeks on maternity leave , I was gone for almost 5 months . Without my DI and CI policies , it would have been a financially crippling event for my family . It was not expected - but it unfortunately happened . Brandon shared some very realistic numbers here for consideration . I applaud anyone looking into these ancillary policies to protect their planning . Sheryl Brown / @AshBrokerage
Great question ! There are a couple of reasons why your policy costs have gone up . The policy you have may have a clause that allows for an adjustment for price each year to match inflation , or rising home values . You may have filed a claim , or cancelled another policy that you had with that company that had allowed a discount , that is now no longer applied . If you live in an area where fires or natural disasters have just occurred , the company may be seeking to recapture lost profits from paid claims . Thanks for asking !
A homeowners policy covers a residence , and the personal property of the insured . If the personal property of the insured is away from the residence there is a percentage of the limit that covers the property at another location . A renters policy provides similar protection , except for coverage for the building . If you are thinking of covering a child who has gone away to college and is renting an apartment with your homeowners policy the basic problem will be liability that might arise from the childs occupancy in the rental unit . If someone slips and falls in the apartment there wouldnt be coverage for a lawsuit .
The thing to kssp in mind with regard to virtually any type of insurance is that the premium charged by the insuring company reflects the risk they are insuring . If your Homeowners ' premium has gone up and you have not filed a claim , more than likely it is because your policy , like most , has a form of `` inflation guard '' built in . That is , each year , the amonut of coverage on the dwelling itself will increase by a certain percentage -LRB- in CT usually about 4 % -RRB- . The increase in coverage will result in an increase in premium . If you have suffered a loss and filed a claim , it is also possible that you are being charged a loss cost or as a result of the claim , have lost a claim free discount that you previously enjoyed . Talk to your insurance professional about increasing your deductible and also about taking advantage of any discounts that are available .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
Wow , people keep asking this question . Does n't anybody get married anymore ? No , you ca n't add your girlfriend to your healthinsurance , she 's not a legal dependent . Girlfriends and boyfriends have a tendency to come into and then drift out of our lives . That 's why they are referred to as friends . Husbands and wives on the other hand have this certain `` stickiness '' and tend to hang around for a long time . Maybe even until death do you part . The bottom line is if you think so highly of your girlfriend that you want to put her on your health insurance then it 's time to make it legal . Of course , now in the era of ObamaCare even marrying her may not be a guarantee you can add her to your employer 's health insurance . Interestingly enough , ObamaCare did n't bother to define spouses as dependents -LRB- I did n't make the law folks I just inform people about it -RRB- and so with health insurance rates skyrocketing you are seeing increasing numbers of employers requiring spouses who are employed at another company that offers health insurance to enroll in their employer 's plan . And a few have gone all in on that interpretation of the law and are n't covering spouses at all -LRB- still pretty rare -RRB- . But , in general , you have to be married to your girlfriend to cover her as a dependent on your health insurance .
Unless you have no family , no friends , no religious affiliation , and no charity or cause that you believe in , you probably should have life insurance . All of the above are reasons to want to leave money after you are gone . You also want funds available for your own burial , trusting someone or some group to handle that for you -LRB- final expenses -RRB- . If you have a spouse , kids , mortgage , think about handling those after you are gone . There are very few folks who do not truly need life insurance . Thank you . GARY LANE .
If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Cover Weight Loss Programs ?
Medicare will cover weight loss programs when weight has a direct impact on health . Some health conditions that may be alleviated by weight loss are sleep apnea , hypertension , joint pain , and diabetes type 2 . Medicare will pay for 3 hours of weight management counseling the first year and two hours of counseling each year after that . If further treatment is needed , Medicare can provide more , including gastric bypass surgery , if needed .
In some situations Medicare will cover weight loss programs . If you have medical conditions that can be treated or better managed with weight loss , Medicare may pay for weight loss counseling . If weight loss is needed to minimize or avoid complications of surgery , Medicare may pay for weight loss programs .
A medical exam for the coverage typically consists of a paramedical exam -LRB- height/weight check and vitals checks such as pulse and blood pressure readings -RRB- , a blood test , and a urine test - sometimes an EKG and/or cognitive testing may be required for older age individuals -RRB- . Even if it 's not asked specifically on the application itself , the carrier will see the input regarding the wls -LRB- I 'm assuming stands for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- surgery in the APS from your doctor . For any fully underwritten life insurance program , the carrier will request a copy of an APS from your doctor , in addition to the completion of a medical exam conducted for the insurance policy -RRB- . An APS is an Attending Physician Statement - in short , it 's a doctor 's summary of your medical history records . For example , if you were being treated for diabetes , it would cite your A1C reading history , prescriptions prescribed for the condition , when it was diagnosed , etc. . In the APS , the carrier will see in the doctor 's notes that you have discussed getting the wls surgery -LRB- I 'm assuming that `` wls '' is supposed to stand for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- and ask if a surgery has been scheduled and/or completed . If it has n't been completed yet , a carrier will postpone approving you for the coverage because you have an outstanding medical procedure on the books that 's still supposed to get done . From a carrier 's perspective , their risk of a claim is greatly increased when they know a surgical operation is upcoming as complications can always occur during any surgery . Please note , after a weight loss surgery procedure and you 've ideally lost a large amount of weight and want to apply for coverage , part of that weight loss can be added in to a carrier 's calculation of height/weight profile . The reason for this is quick weight loss for people -LRB- whether via surgery , diet and exercise , liposuction , etc. -RRB- can often result in some individuals gaining a percentage of that weight back - unfortunately not everyone always keeps all of the pounds off . So if you apply for coverage within 12 months of that rapid weight loss , a carrier may add half the weight loss amount back to your total . For example , if you weight 300 pounds and loss 120 pounds after a procedure , now you 're sitting at 180 pounds . If you applied for coverage soon after having lost that 120 pounds , the carrier would add 60 back to your total and base the underwriting on a height/weight profile of 240 pounds -LRB- 180 +60 -RRB- . The purpose of the 12 month differential is to show stability in the person 's weight loss and that they have a good chance of keeping off the weight . Please also note , alternative options will still result in the same outcome -LRB- e.g. non-medical life insurance -RRB- because a question on almost every application will ask in some format `` are there any outstanding tests or other medical procedures outstanding or waiting to be completed '' . You would only be able to secure a graded policy with a low face amount -LRB- $ 25k or $ 50k maximum -RRB- , which does not appear to be in the ballpark of the coverage you 're looking to secure -LRB- you noted $ 900k in your question 's statement -RRB- . If you have a policy already in force , you can elect to convert all or a portion of it to permanent coverage . The conversion would keep the risk class that the original policy had and would simply just calculate the rates based on your age . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare will pay for weight loss programs under certain conditions . Some things to know are : Medicare will pay for weight loss programs only if weight loss is needed to treat certain health conditions related to being overweight , or is needed before surgery to reduce the risk of complications . Up to three hours of individual counseling about weight loss is provided the first year , and two hours per year after that . If you need more treatment than that , Medicare may pay for more with a doctor 's prescription and if the treatment is medially approved by Medicare .
There may be some plans that offer discounts on weight loss programs or gym memberships but generally your health will not cover a weight loss program you purchase over the counter . Every health insurance plan is different however and may offer at least some type of coverage depending on the weight loss program , is it medically necessary and prescribed by the doctor . Check with your agent to see what your policy covers .
In some situations Medicare will cover weight loss programs . If you have medical conditions that can be treated or better managed with weight loss , Medicare may pay for weight loss counseling . If weight loss is needed to minimize or avoid complications of surgery , Medicare may pay for weight loss programs .
Medicare will cover weight loss programs when weight has a direct impact on health . Some health conditions that may be alleviated by weight loss are sleep apnea , hypertension , joint pain , and diabetes type 2 . Medicare will pay for 3 hours of weight management counseling the first year and two hours of counseling each year after that . If further treatment is needed , Medicare can provide more , including gastric bypass surgery , if needed .
Medicare covers some weight loss programs when medically necessary . There must be a health condition that would be alleviated by weight loss in order for Medicare to pay . The program can include counseling , or , if more is needed , Medicare may pay for more options , including gastric bypass surgery under certain conditions .
Medicare will pay for weight loss surgery if the BMI is over 35 , if there is a health condition related to obesity that will be cured or alleviated by losing weight through the weight loss surgery , if weight loss must occur before treatment can be effectively undertaken for another health problem , and if other treatments are not expected to work to produce sufficient weight loss . There is a psychological evaluation done prior to surgery to make sure it should be done .
Medicare will pay for gastric sleeve , gastric bypass , lap band , or duodenal switch for weight loss , under certain conditions . There must be a health problem associated with being obese , such as sleep apnea or type 2 diabetes . The condition of being overweight must have existed for at least 5 years . You must pass a psychological evaluation , have tried at least one other weight loss program that has failed , and other illnesses as the cause of your obesity must be ruled out . You also need a BMI of over 35 to be approved for Medicare gastric sleeve surgery .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
No , Qsymia is not covered by Medicare , Medicaid or Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Part D . You may be eligible for Qysmia 's Get Started ! or Save Now ! programs they offer in conjunction with several pharmacies . For more information about these weight loss medication payment programs , visit Qsymia 's website at WEBSITELINK .
It sounds like you have a decision to make : A. postpone or cancel your elective weight loss surgery so that you can get the life insurance now , or B.postpone getting life insurance until after you have your weight loss surgery . If you have found a policy for which you qualify weight wise , are not suffering health complications from your weight , and need $ 900,000 of coverage for a loan or other reason , you could probably qualify by simply postponing your surgery for a year . Of course , if your health is at risk , getting the surgery can not only help your health , but improve your life insurance rates in the future .
Medicare will pay for laparoscopic adjustable gastric band if the following three conditions are met : 1 -RRB- You must have a BMI of 35 or over at the time of surgery ; 2 -RRB- You must have a qualifying health condition associated with your being overweight that losing weight through gastric banding would help ; and 3 -RRB- You must complete a 6 month Physician Supervised Weight Loss Program proximate to the time of the surgery .
Medicare does not cover liposuction as its considered a cosmetic procedure , even if you have an underlying medical condition related to weight . Some bariatric surgeries may be covered depending on medical necessity , such as a gastric bypass or gastric banding . If youre unsure whether your specific circumstances for a procedure would be covered by Medicare , you can contact Medicare directly to find out if the procedure would be covered . When procedures are covered by Medicare , they typically only pay for about 80 % of the covered healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . If you do not have one in place already , I would suggest considering the purchase of one . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare can cover gastric bypass surgery under certain conditions . Some of those are : 1 -RRB- BMI must be 35 or greater . 2 -RRB- There must be at least one health condition related to weight . 3 -RRB- There must be documentation of failure to lose weight by other methods . 4 -RRB- A psychological evaluation is required . 5 -RRB- Other medical treatments for weight loss have been ruled out . 6 -RRB- The provider and type of surgery must be approved by Medicare .
Your weight is a significant aspect in the underwriting process . Too heavy a build can mean higher rates or an outright decline for a person seeking the best possible rates for themselves . What you have to understand about underwriting is an underwriter has to make a `` guess '' based on your information one time . They can not track your health over time and adjust cost as the policy goes . The problem with excess weight is it can be traced to other health conditions which lower life expectancy , which either drives up cost or leads to a decline . An insured can however after a year or so , ask for the insurance company to reconsider their rating if they have lost weight and can show some consistency in maintaining the weight loss .
As a general rule , a `` tummy tuck '' is viewed as cosmetic surgery and is not covered by health insurance polices . However , obesity is becoming an increasing problem in our nation.This has resulted in a growing number of people who have reached health or life threatening levels of morbid obesity for which they have had either prescription and/or surgical treatments that result in extreme weight loss . In some cases the weight gain has stretched the person 's skin to such an extent that after their extreme weight loss following treatment their skin does not return to normal levels and the person is left with folds of skin which can , in some cases , become sources of medical problems themselves -LRB- e.g. - severe rashes and infections -RRB- . In these extreme circumstances the insurance company may agree that it is an issue of medical necessity that this issue be surgically addressed and the will approve coverage for the removal or lifting of this excess skin tissue . This has been the only circumstance where I have seen an insurance carrier approve what might be construed as a tummy tuck .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
No , homeowners insurance does not cover maintenance . If you have a covered loss the replacement of any damaged electrical components would be included but it will not pay for general electrical work . Covered loss would be things like fire , lightening , wind , hail , weight of ice and snow . Check with your agent if you feel your loss may be covered .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will My Homeowners Insurance Cover My Wedding Ring ?
Your homeowners insurance will cover your wedding ring if the value of the ring does not exceed the amount of insurance you have for jewelry watches and furs in your homeowners policy . For most people the base amount of insurance is $ 2500 . If the value of your wedding ring exceeds that , you should contact your agent and get your policy amended to a higher value . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
Your homeowners insurance will cover your wedding ring if the value of the ring does not exceed the amount of insurance you have for jewelry watches and furs in your homeowners policy . For most people the base amount of insurance is $ 2500 . If the value of your wedding ring exceeds that , you should contact your agent and get your policy amended to a higher value . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
Lost items generally are not covered under a Homeowners ' policy 's standard terms and conditions . However , if you have items that are specifically insured on a rider , jewelry for example , then the coverage provided by the rider is broader . In those cases , `` mysterious disappearance '' is a covered peril . That means if you find that the diamond has fallen out of your engagement ring , or your grandmother 's wedding ring can not be found , then you would have coverage under the rider so long as the item was listed and documented .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Not if the ring is not `` scheduled '' specifically for coverage as a rider to your Homeowners ' policy . Homeowners covers your belongings for specific perils , as listed in the contract . If an item is `` lost '' or `` mysteriously dissappears '' , these unfortunately are not covered perils in a Homeowners policy . If the ring is scheduled on a rider or insured separately on it 's own such policy , then the lost ring 's replacement would be covered .
Renter 's insurance vary a lot so the only way to know for sure is to file a claim . With that said the ring is probably covered with a small sublimit of $ 1,500 or so and you would have to pay your deductible . If you need coverage for more than that you need to call/email your insurance company and say `` I 'd like to specifically schedule my engagement ring for $ X with a deductible of $ Y. Special causes of loss , replacement cost please . I have a picture , receipt and appraisal ready for you '' . That will assure that your engagement ring is covered to it 's full value , minus the deductible you choose and for the widest coverage possible .
Usually , but in a fairly limited way . If there is coverage , it will be for the named perils listed in the policy AND subject to your Homeowners ' Deductible . The coverage may also be limited to a specific dollar amount per piece . If you do have jewelry or other higher value items that you are concerned about , it is best to talk to you insurance professional about `` scheduling '' those items for coverage either on a homeowners ' `` rider '' or as a separate policy all together . There are a couple of advantages to this . First , the item will be covered to it 's appraised value as opposed to some significantly smaller amount . Second , when scheduled these items are usually then NOT subject to the homeowners ' deductible . Finally , in addition to the perils listed in the Homeowners policy , scheduled items are also covered for `` mysterious dissappearance '' which is much broader coverage . This means that there would be coverage even if the item was simply lost . If your diamond falls out of your engagement ring and the ring is scheduled , there would be coverage to replace the stone . There would be no such coverage under a standard Homeowners ' policy .
An engagement ring would be considered personal property and be covered to the limits of the policy . However , the company will generally have a fixed limit for loss involving jewelry . You may find that your ability to recover from a lost engagement ring would be seriously reduced by the deductible on the policy . If you are concerned about replacing an engagement ring , most companies provide a floater policy that will cover that exact ring anywhere in the world 365 days a year and often provides the coverage without a deductible .
There are a couple reasons parents would buy life insurance on their baby . For one a true whole life insurance policy accumulates cash value which could be used to help out in life events such as college or a wedding . It also guarantees the insurability of the child . For example , one of my co-workers purchased life insurance on his young son who developed diabetes at age 13 . If he had not done so , his son would have a hard time finding a company who would insure him .
A ring is personal property . Renters insurance covers personal property . The limits of the policy are stated on the declarations . Inside the policy there is a paragraph that describes the reduction in limits for personal property that is not on the premises at the time of loss . There is likely to be another paragraph that limits the companys liability for the loss of jewelry . The adjustment , however , will include a reduction for the deductible . Check the deductible on your policy . If the deductible is greater than the value of your ring you will probably be unable to recover very much of the cost of the ring .
It depends . What is the value of your engagement ring ? Most insurance companies limit jewelry coverage to $ 1500 - $ 2500 . Check with your insurance provider to see what their jewelry limits are for personal property . If your engagement ring value is higher , then you will need to `` schedule '' that item under your renters insurance policy . Send your insurance company the appraisal document , provide a detailed description of the ring and an accurate replacement value .
A Renters Insurance policy , much like a Homeowners , is designed for broad coverage over more standard personal property . The best way to protect valuables , like an engagement ring , is to `` schedule '' it specifically either as a rider on the Renters Policy , or on it 's own . Bydoing this , you will be covering the piecemuch more completely . You will need to provide your insurance professional with an appraisalwhichincludes both a detailed description of the ring , setting and stone -LRB- s -RRB- along with the stated complete value .
In the culture in which we live , providing living expenses , education and supervision for a minor child in the event that you 're not alive as the primary care giver are stewardship concerns for any parent . Another cultural consideration of financialsignificancein raising a daughter is the funding of her wedding . The coverage period should be from the child 's present age to age 21 . The cost to raise your child should not be a burden on the custodian , so the annual expense ofraisingthat child over the years thatprecedethe child 's 21st birthday may be a minimum of $ 12,000 a year , plus acollegeeducation at a state university around $ 50,000 for four years and $ 25,000 - $ 30,000 for a wedding if cultural norms are maintained.So you could be looking at $ 250,000 - $ 300,000 just to cover a minor child at theminimumfinancialcommitments through graduation and marriage . Now add your final expenses for a funeral and medical bills to all your debts and mortgages . The typical single parent made need an additional $ 400,000 - $ 500,000 to coverage these items . A guaranteed level term policy should be fairlyinexpensive if your a healthy nonsmoker and under the age of 50 . For a realisticquote , feel free to contact steve@thebiz.tv .
Jewelry that is lost is considered mysterious disappearance and would not be covered under a standard homeowners insurance policy . You should ask you local independent agent for a PAF or Personal Articles Floater that would cover the ring for this type of peril . Some insurance companies will add it on as a rider to the homeowners policy rather than issuing a separate policy .
Salvage and recovery relates to subrogation and rights of recovery that an insurance company reserves for themselves after indemnifying you for a loss . The entire concept of salvage , recovery , subrogation , and indemnification fill up text books . Insurance is a contract and in the contract the insurance company has been asked by you , in exchange for mutual understandings and agreements , to provide protection against certain kinds of losses . When your insurance company indemnifies you for your loss , they replace you in position of right in many situations . For example , if your car were damaged beyond repair , the carrier pays to you the value of the car and in doing so , assumes right and title to the salvage value of your car . They sell this salvage to businesses that resell the usable parts and the insurance company uses the money they collect to lower the final dollar cost of paying your loss to you . Recovery usually relates to the right of the carrier to pursue `` recovery '' from the responsible , negligent party who damaged your car . This process is referred to as subrogating and the carrier seeks to recovery from the at-fault and negligent driver -LRB- under tort laws -RRB- all or a portion of the amounts they paid to make you whole after your loss . Another closely related provision in your insurance is the right of `` abandonment '' . Insurance companies do not grant you the right to abandon your property so you can collect a larger reimbursement . This may come up during the settlement of pairs and sets , like ear rings . The insurance company will not let you surrender -LRB- abandon -RRB- to them the other ear ring so you can make the insurance carrier liable for a larger amount so you can buy a new set of ear rings . The obligation of the carrier is to the amount of the the loss even if only a partial loss . That 's why your company will repair a car rather than pay you the full value when there is a partial loss . There are other places where salvage comes up , like in inland and ocean marine , but for the vast bulk of readers the latter answers explain how these terms impact your coverage and how your insurance company will deal with you .
Property losses , such as an engagement ring , are covered by a renters policy subject to internal limits and a deductible . Your $ 3,000 engagement ring if stolen would be adjusted by the deductible and the policy limit . As a result you would receive approximately $ 1,000 for your loss . High valued items should be scheduled to avoid deductibles and make sure the loss is fully covered .
A renters insurance policy will cover the theft of jewelry however in most cases the limit is $ 1000.00 . If this is not enough coverage then I suggest you schedule the ring for an additional premium so the ring is fully covered for it 's value . Also when you schedule an item the coverage 's are broadened to include mysterious disappearance .
I agree fully with Ted 's answer above . In my lease it actually has a penalty -LRB- $ 30 -RRB- for every month you do not show proof of insurance ! As an agent that deals with many Renters , I urge them to get coverage because I have seen what happens without it . I had a friend lose the stone in their engagement ring 3 weeks after they got it and they had no coverage !
Talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy because there may be limitations on the coverage that your standard policy may provide . The ring is personal property , but many policies limit the amount of coverage on `` unscheduled '' jewelry that is pieces that are not specifically insured either as a rider or as a stand alone policy . It is best to insure your ring specifically because not only is the coverage broader -LRB- it even covers if the stone falls out and is lost and a standard renters policy wo n't -RRB- but in most cases , the policy deductible will not apply . Get a clear copy of your appraisal and give it to yur licensed agent and they will be able to cover it properly for you .
If a household has two wage earners and their household budget relies on both incomes then both need to be covered . That being said , a husband annual earning tied to as inflation rate of 3 % is the most important defensive planning part of determining the amount of life insurance . Calculating his life expectancy based on family history and current health projections can create a baseline for planning purposes . Second to that are the family mortgage and all other debts . Third , future obligations like the childrens education and weddings . Fourth , covering all final medical expenses and funeral costs . We can determine how much life insurance you need .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Geico Provide Life Insurance ?
Yes , Geico provides life insurance to its customers by referring such customers to my firm , LifeQuotes.com . At WEBSITELINK you can instantly comparerate quotesof 35 leading life companies ranging from $ 5,000 to $ 25 million . Our rating engine handles 30 common illnesses and customers are free to buy from any company shown .
GEICO or Government Employees Insurance Companyper se does not underwrite a life insurance , it is primarily a property and casualty company focused on auto , boats , motorcycles , RVs , etc. . You may find that agents that sell GEICO products offer life insurance but through other life insurance companies or will refer the life insurance business out to other carriers .
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Geico does not actually insure Renters or Homeowners . Geico partners with other insurance companies like Travelers and ASI who provide the insurance . Geico claims to cut out the middle man but that 's simply not true . Geico is an independent agency just like every local agency in your community . Geico just spends a tremendous amount of money to convince the public they are the cheapest and the best . It 's simple not true .
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
Geico does not sell life insurance originated within their own company . If you attempt to get a life insurance quote from Geico 's website it will take you to another agency . Geico says on their website that life insurance policies are written through non affiliated companies and secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. .
Geico is really two entities . One is the insurance company that provides auto and vehicle coverage . The other is the Geico insurance agency . They are simply like any other independent agency in that they represent other companies through which they place insurance . This is what Geico does with life insurance . If you purchase life insurance with them , it will be placed with a different company . That does n't necessarily make it bad . It 's most likely a company that many independents write through . My advice is to find the right agent . One you can trust to do the best thing for you and your family , not just the cheapest option . Then listen to him/her and take their advice . You 'll come out ahead in the long run .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does Geico have life insurance ? Most of you know that Geico is a property casualty insurance company , and of course they have the gecko as their advertising mascot . They outsource all their life insurance applications off their web to an outside vendor , so they do n't really manufacture term life insurance nor do the manufacture permanent life insurance . So when you 're looking for life insurance and you 're one of their actual policy holders in property casualty , a lot of times you 'll stay within that agency and you 'll go ahead and purchase other insurances like life insurance . If you 're looking for life insurance , you may want to also look online at different brokerage houses to see if their price tags are any better than what Geico is offering .
In answer to your question here , unless someone has knowledge to the contrary , Geico backs Geico homeowner policies . Even though Geico is a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway , the Company of which Mr. Warren Buffett is Chairman , the Geico Corporation is licensed to do business in all States and would pay claims under the Geico name .
Geico offers Term Life Insurance through non-affiliated insurance companies . In other words , the life insurance is not underwritten by Geico ; Geico just helps you get it by referring you to a brokerage that carries quotes from multiple life insurance companies . The agency they refer you to is not owned by Geico .
Geico does not write Homeowners insurance . If you have your Auto insurance with Geico , they will typically offer you a Homeowners quote through Geico General Agency and the insurance company they use is Travelers Ins . Co. . They do this so that you can receive a Multi-policy discount . I hope this answered your question .
Geico life insurance is written through non-affiliated life insurance companies and is secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. . Therefore , Geico offers life insurance from a number of different life insurance companies at a variety of prices . You can get free life insurance quotes from any number of websites . By choosing one that gives `` instant '' quotes you will get your rates without having to talk to anyone .
Geico does write home insurance as a broker but not as an insurer . This means that you can work with a Geico representative to purchase a home policy and they can even service the policy , but that policy is actually written through another carrier . If you have a home policy through Geico you can find out who the insurer by reviewing the policy declarations page .
Geico acts as both an insurance company and an insurance agency for other insurance carriers . Although Geico is known for their Direct Auto Insurance Policies , Geico Home Insurance is offered by Stillwater Insurance Group . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
GEICO or Government Employees Insurance Companyper se does not underwrite a life insurance , it is primarily a property and casualty company focused on auto , boats , motorcycles , RVs , etc. . You may find that agents that sell GEICO products offer life insurance but through other life insurance companies or will refer the life insurance business out to other carriers .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Geico is a National Automobile Insurance provider ; the insurance company does not underwrite Home Insurance . However , they have a wholly owned subsidiary insurance agency which brokers out home insurance to other insurance companies . Since you will not receive a multi lines policy from an insurance company if your home and auto are not with the same carrier ; you would be better informed if you were to purchase the auto insurance from Geico and purchase the home insurance directly from a discount home insurance company . An online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online has been discovered ; it may be used by Escrow Professionals , Mortgage Professionals and directly by Consumers . This link is an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Let me share my experience.I 'm a licensed fee-based -LRB- accept no commissions -RRB- insurance consultant who has studied insurance , obtained a number of industry designations , owned and operated a general insurance agency for nearly forty years and helped thousands of insurance consumers with their insurance questions . I have long harbored ill will toward GEICO and other insurers who chose not to do business with independent agents . I believe their sales staff -LRB- and that of other insurers selling direct to the public -RRB- are trained to sell what the insurer wants to sell ; not what the consumer really needs . But I recently sought to purchase auto insurance for myself and checked out a number of on-line insurance offerings . GEICO 's premiums were one third of those indicated by E-surance , Progressive , and several others . The application process and live discussion with a sales person was cordial , professional and non-threatening . I was able to access my coverage information on-line , pay premiums directly and obtain insurance cards.Actually my experience was better than any I 've had with any independent agent . My conclusion , it is still important to know what you need and want . It is you against a large insurer and that means be cautious . But for my money I certainly would consider GEICO as an insurer.If nothing else they deserve a look .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will My Homeowners Insurance Cover Asbestos ?
A homeowners policy is designed to pay for damages to your home and personal property that arise from named perils . These perils include fire , wind , etc. . They do not include issues that have to do with maintenance of the structure . It is highly unlikely that your homeowners policy will pay for the removal of asbestos from the building .
Homeowners insurance and as far as I know any property policy in the United States as a specific Asbestos exclusion in the policy . Thehomeownerspolicy will exclude any clean up , removal or illness related to Asbestos until the end of time . If you have asbestos in your home I highly recommend you call in a profession asbestos removal team . Health of your family is primary .
Homeowners insurance protects the owner for damages that come from specified perils One peril is fire . If the home is damaged in a fire and asbestos removal is required to repair the home , it would be considered in the claim . There is an additional coverage available on a homeowners policy that provides additional money if repairs require adjustments to meet building codes . That coverage would be helpful under these circumstances . However , removal of asbestos for personal reasons would not be a covered peril .
A Homeowners Insurance policy provides coverage for losses caused by perils either named in the policy or , conversely , not excluded by the policy . Asbestos removal , like taking down a damaged or diseased tree is considered property maintenance and this is not a covered peril in a Homeowners ' Policy . Therefore , the cost of maintenance actions such as these and others , though prudent , are not covered .
Generally the answer to that would be no . Your Homeowners is not designed to cover this type of renovation . If your home is damaged by a covered peril then the removal of asbestos would be covered as part of the repairs , but otherwise you will have to pay .
A homeowners policy is designed to pay for damages to your home and personal property that arise from named perils . These perils include fire , wind , etc. . They do not include issues that have to do with maintenance of the structure . It is highly unlikely that your homeowners policy will pay for the removal of asbestos from the building .
Check your homeowners insurance policy to see what is in the coverage exclusion clause . The wording in a policy exclusion clause may not specifically say `` asbestos '' . Often , broader terminology is used such as `` contaminant '' or `` pollutant '' . In some cases , these terms may be better defined elsewhere in the contract . There is a customer service phone number listed on your policy that should get you a quick answer .
In most instances the policy will not cover to remove asbestos just because you have asbestos present in your home . We would need more information to answer the question with certainty . If the removal of asbestos is required due to an insurable loss taking place it will most likely be covered as an ensuing loss .
When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Removal of asbestos would probably not meet this definition of coverage . Check with your insurance agent .
Homeowners Insurance can cover injuries sustained on the property . There are two sections to the homeowners insurance policy . Section I is the property section and covers Dwelling , other structures , personal property & loss of use coverage . Section II of a homeowners insurance policy covers liability - namely Personal Liability & Medical Payments . The medical payments section is designed to cover injuries that are not the policy owns fault . I usually use an example . . so here it is , `` if you are over my house on Thanksgiving and you are cutting my turkey with my knife and you cut yourself coverage can be afforded under the policy . '' In this case there was no negligence on my part but you did sustain injuries . We assuming there was nothing wrong with the floor to cause you to slip and the knife was functioning correctly . Keep in mind that every policy is different and I suggest you check with your local independent agent for coverage information that is specific to your policy . Hope this helps .
Great Question . Homeowners insurance is separated into Property & Liability coverage . Section I of the policy covers property . It includes Dwelling , Other Structures , Personal Property & Loss of Use -LRB- a place to stay while home is repaired/rebuilt -RRB- . As for what perils are covered it depends on the type of form that your policy is written on . Most homeowners policies are written on an ISO HO-3 form which is considered an All Risk policy . This will cover just about everything that is n't excluded for the dwelling . Exclusions include-flood , mechanical breakdown , wear & tear , intentional acts , nuclear and a few others . Your liability -LRB- Section II -RRB- of the policy includes Personal Liability & Medical Payments . Coverage 's E & F respectively . Most people understand Personal Liability . . most do not understand Medical Payments . Generally speaking , medical payments cover an event at your house that injures someone but the homeowner was not negligent . . For example - if you are over my house on Thanksgiving cutting my Turkey with my knife and you cut yourself this could be covered under the medical payments . Hope this helps
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
Normal 0 This question is really tough to answer because you are not defining what actual coverage you want your homeowner 's policy to provide . But I would respond to this question this way . Id want my homeowners policy to provide Guaranteed Replacement Cost coverage on my house , Replacement Cost coverage on my personal property and All-risk * coverage on both . Id want at least a $ 300,000 limit for Personal Liability and a $ 1000 property deductible . I would expect the amount of insurance on my house to be consistent with the current cost to replace it and if the premium I was quoted was more than $ 2-3 per thousand , I would keep looking .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Where Can I Get Group Health Insurance ?
There are two paths to getting group health insurance for your business . First , the `` do it yourself '' approach where you can call up or go to a health insurance carrier 's web site and request a quote . Of course , this assumes you know all the health insurance carrier options in your state and that you will know what information you need to have available to get a quote . You may also discover that a health insurance carrier does n't work directly with the group consumer and they will recommend you seek out an insurance broker . Keep in mind that a group health insurance carrier can only talk to you about their products and services so you ca n't expect them to help you comparison shop and , of course , every health insurance carrier thinks their products are the best . This brings us to the appropriate option , seek out a group health insurance broker . Do a web search , ask a fellow businessperson or friend but find an experienced , knowledgeable employee benefits professional to guide you through this process . There is a lot involved in setting up an employee benefits program and with the market changes imposed by Obamacare the task has become even more complex and demanding . If you are needing help in setting up or reviewing your group health plan contact me at WEBSITELINK .
You should only be dealing with group underwriting if your group has more than 50 employees or you are considering a self-funded group health plan . The employees in your group will have to complete an application form and answer a variety of medical questions regarding various health conditions and prescription drug usage . These forms are then submitted for underwriting where an underwriter takes into consideration what health conditions exist in the group -LRB- diabetes , cancer , pregnancies , expensive maintenance drugs , etc. -RRB- and then makes a determination if the originally quoted rates for your group will generate enough premium to cover the average expected risk plus the now disclosed risks in your group . For example , if based on the census of your group the male to female ratio and average age in the group indicated a need for $ 20,000 per month in premium to cover the expected risk and overhead associated with your group you would start out with an proposal costing $ 240,000 annually . It is assumed there will be a certain average amount of health care consumption in your group based solely on the factors I 've described above . If , however , your group has risks in it that go beyond what is standardly assumed should exist -LRB- you have a large number of diabetics or some pregnancies in the pipleline or an ongoing cancer case for examples -RRB- then the underwriter will `` adjust '' the originally quoted rates to reflect the need for more premium to cover these higher than anticipated medical expenses . So , if the underwriter determines that your group is more likely to cost $ 300,000 in medical expenses and overhead rather than $ 220,000 as originally quoted , the underwriter will return a `` counter offer '' with a 36 % rate adjustment -LRB- $ 300K / $ 220K -RRB- to accept your group at its real risk level .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
There are two paths to getting group health insurance for your business . First , the `` do it yourself '' approach where you can call up or go to a health insurance carrier 's web site and request a quote . Of course , this assumes you know all the health insurance carrier options in your state and that you will know what information you need to have available to get a quote . You may also discover that a health insurance carrier does n't work directly with the group consumer and they will recommend you seek out an insurance broker . Keep in mind that a group health insurance carrier can only talk to you about their products and services so you ca n't expect them to help you comparison shop and , of course , every health insurance carrier thinks their products are the best . This brings us to the appropriate option , seek out a group health insurance broker . Do a web search , ask a fellow businessperson or friend but find an experienced , knowledgeable employee benefits professional to guide you through this process . There is a lot involved in setting up an employee benefits program and with the market changes imposed by Obamacare the task has become even more complex and demanding . If you are needing help in setting up or reviewing your group health plan contact me at WEBSITELINK .
Group health insurance is a health insurance policy or plan -LRB- depending upon how it is funded -RRB- that is provided by an employer for its employees or through an organization such as a labor union for its members . In a group health insurance policy situation the employer is the actual policy holder and its employees and covered dependents are subscribers who receive a certificate of coverage . In this context the employee 's health insurance is tied to their place of employment and while -LRB- depending upon the size of the group -RRB- there are state and federal laws that allow for an ex-employee to continue their coverage through the group plan for some defined period of time , eventually a former employee will lose access to their ex-employer 's group plan and have to replace it coverage from a new employer or individual health insurance . With the latest round of implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- effective January 1 , 2014 group health insurance is in many ways more complicated than ever before . For instance , employers in the 2 to 50 employee market segment in the vast majority of statesnow operate in a community rated situation and are finding that new benefit plan designs are being presented to them that may differ significantly from their current rate structures and plan designs . Fully insured ACA compliant health plans for the 2 to 50 market segment are now guaranteed to be issued , are not subject to underwriting and can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods -LRB- just to highlight some of the most major changes -RRB- . Larger sized groups , while they are certainly impacted by the effects of the ACA , are still operating under a mix of the old rules and the new ones . So , right now groups with 51 + employees are still subject to underwriting , though the new ACA rules will be migrating up the ladder to apply to groups in the 51 to 99 employee range in the future . There will be groups who will be winners and losers under the requirements of the ACA and depending upon the composition of the group and its average income levels for its workforce , some employers may find that providing group health insurance is no longer in the best financial interest of many of their employees when compared with the subsidized individual health insurance that many of their employees could qualify for . If you are an employer faced with these issues and are looking for experienced guidance on these matters please feel free to contact me for a consultation .
If you are lucky enough to work for an employer who pays 100 % of the employee rate for the group health insurance they offer -LRB- pretty rare these days -RRB- then standard group contracts require all eligible employees to be enrolled . So , in that circumstance you might get health insurance coverage whether you want it or not . If you have to contribute towards the cost of the health insurance provided by your employer then you have the right to waive participating in your employer 's group health plan . I will presume , though , that your question is really about the `` Individual Mandate '' provision of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and its requirement starting on January 1 , 2014 that a person have health insurance coverage that meets the minimum essential benefit requirements under the law or be subject to the `` Shared Responsibility Payment '' -LRB- does n't that sound better than tax penalty ? -RRB- on your income taxes . ObamaCare does give you the choice of either getting health insurance coverage or going without coverage and potentially being subject to a tax penalty . In that sense you can opt out of having health insurance coverage . But wait there 's more ! The Affordable Care Act provides for persons in certain situations or who are members of certain groups to be exempt from the individual mandate requirement . Some examples are ; 1 -RRB- If the cost of coverage for you is more than 8 % of your annual household income 2 -RRB- If your annual income is below the threshold where you have to file personal income taxes 3 -RRB- If you qualify for a `` hardship '' exemption -LRB- this can be an escape route for many people -RRB- 4 -RRB- If you have had a gap in being covered of less than 3 months during the tax year 5 -RRB- Members of religious groups that object to coverage on religious grounds 6 -RRB- Members of non-profit religious organizations where members share costs 7 -RRB- Prison inmates 8 -RRB- Non U.S. citizens 9 -RRB- Native American tribe members 10 -RRB- Year long residents of U.S. territories such as Puerto Rico and Guam What could be more simple ? I hope this helps answer your question .
Health insurance for small businesses works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan . There are different types of programs available for group coverage and each business may have a different tolerance for what they 're willing to take on in terms of price or what they 're willing to offer to their employees . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There 's really no way to say what group coverage costs without going through that input first to create the quotes . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you will need to consult with an experienced health insurance broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help -LRB- we can help you get your company 's group health insurance set up -RRB- and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
You can cancel your health insurance . If it is individual health insurance you purchased directly from a health insurance carrier you should be able to contact their billing and eligibility unit to cancel your coverage or contact your insurance broker for them to assist you in the termination . If you purchased your individual coverage directly through Healthcare.gov without the assistance of a health insurance broker then you are on your own as far as dealing with the helpful people at Heathcare.gov -LRB- and to be honest , while they are government employees my experience with them on the whole has n't been bad -RRB- but even then you should really be dealing with the insurance carrier you selected . Perhaps you are insured under a group health insurance plan at your place of employment and you are paying your share of the group insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis under a Section 125 plan -LRB- an IRS approved program that allows your insurance premiums to be taken out of your paycheck before your taxes are calculated -RRB- . If your work status has notchanged -LRB- e.g - going from full-time to part-time status -RRB- and you have not experienced one of the allowed change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , having a child , etc. -RRB- under the IRS regulations then you are essentially locked into your current enrollment status until your group 's next renewal date . In this circumstance simply deciding after you 've enrolled in the group health plan that you want to use that money for some other purpose is not reason enough to allow you to cancel your group health insurance coverage . This would be the circumstance where you might not be allowed to cancel your health insurance coverage .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
The term `` group '' health insurance is generally associated with health insurance coverage obtained through a person 's place of employment . Group insurance can also be associated with other organizations with a legally recognized structure and common interest , labor unions and professional associations -LRB- state bar & state medical associations for instance -RRB- are examples . But , in the largest sense -LRB- by far -RRB- , what most people are talking about when they refer to group health insurance is employment based coverage . Technically , in the group health insurance environment , the employer is the policyholder and the employer 's covered employees and dependents receive certificates of coverage to identify their covered status under the employer 's group health plan . As such , it is really a business/non-profit organization/governmental entity that obtains the health insurance policy for their employees so the employer is who can get the group health insurance and then any of their eligible employees can choose to enroll in it . In all but a few states for a business to qualify as a group it must have at least 2 eligible employees .
Group health insurance works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan Group health insurance is health insurance a business owns and offers to its employees . The business generally pays for a percentage of the premiums with the employees paying the rest . It 's often offered as a means of attracting people to come work from them . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , I recommend contacting an experienced broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . Having too many `` hands in the cookie jar '' can sometimes make things confusing . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes , Group life insurance works . Group life will pay a claim , just as an individual policy would . The question with group life , is should it be your only form of life insurance ? While it is nice that a portion is picked up by most employers -LRB- up to 50,000 -RRB- as they get a tax deduction for providing coverage to a point . However , as an individual on a group plan , you have no control over the situation . If your employer changes plans or decides to end the benefit , you have no coverage . Where this can become a problem is if your health changes while in the group plan . The plan ends , you still need coverage , but your health may prevent you from getting covered or covered at a reasonble price . With group coverage , you do n't have a lot of say over the coverage . It is always better to find your own coverage that suits your needs and then using group coverage as bonus coverage as no telling if it will be there when you need it to be .
You areprobably talking about the Childrens Health Insurance Program -LRB- CHIP -RRB- rather than Medicaid . These are two separate programs andthey operate under different rules and eligibility criteria.Eligibility rules will vary from state to state but they are based upon the parent 's income level . In most states a family of four can earn up to $ 47,700 annually and still qualify for this program . To get more detailed information you should call the CHIP hotline at 1-877-543-7669 and explain your specific situation to them to get a definitive answer for your state . Where your situation gets much more complex is in regards to Section 125 of the IRS regulations and whether your child would qualify for coverage under Title 19 of the Social Security Act or Title 21 -LRB- where CHIP come into the picture -RRB- . If your employer has a Section 125 plan in place and you are currently paying for your share of the health insurance on a pre-tax basis -LRB- the probability that this is the case is pretty high as most employers have adopted such plans -RRB- then you are probably locked into your current coverage until your group 's next open enrollment period . This is because becoming eligible for CHIP is not a `` qualifying event '' under the IRS guidelines that would allow you to drop your child from your group coverage during the group 's plan year . To be eligible for Medicaid under Title 19 there generally has to be a disability of some type involved or where one parent is absent , incapacitated or unemployed .
It used to mean that for an individual applying for individual health insurance or for an employer group applying for group health insurance that the individual or the employees would have to answer medical questions and perhaps provide rather detailed information on any pre-existing health conditions that they or their dependents to be covered might have . This has essentially become a non-issue in the fully insured individual or group health insurance markets after January 1 , 2o14 as the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- no longer allows for the underwriting of such health insurance policies . Underwriting may still be encountered in the group health insurance market if an employer has or is implementing a self-funded health insurance plan . As these plans are subject to the Federal ERISA guidelines asking medical questions and adjusting a group 's rates for the medical risk -LRB- s -RRB- in the group is still allowed .
Purchasing health insurance for an LLC is no different than applying for an individual or group health insurance plan . If the LLC has few or one one employee then individual policies would make the most financial sense . If the LLC wants to provide benefits for all its employees then either a small group plan or a defined benefit plan will make sense . Group 's plans require an in depth fact finding analysis to uncover the true needs of the group . Important factors include : Size of the group Number of employee participating Amount employer wants to subsidize - if any ? Type of benefits Are employees local or spread out among states The new trend in 2014 for small group is setting up a defined contribution plan -LRB- section 105 plan -RRB- where the employer subsidizes a set amount to employees tax-free and the employees use that money to offset their health insurance premium , costs etc for the individual plans they purchase .
With the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- that became effective January 1 , 2014 , the differences in what group and individual health insurance cover are virtually nonexistent . The removal of underwriting , pre-existing condition exclusions and/or limitations and the addition of guaranteed issue and maternity coverage to both policy types has furthered leveled the playing field between group health and individual health insurance products . The crucial advantage group health plans continue to enjoy versus their individual market counterparts are tax issue related . What an employer contributes towards the health insurance coverage of their employees is a deductible business expense and in some small group cases may even qualify for a tax credit . In addition , employees can pay for their share of group health premiums using pre-tax dollars under a Section 125 Plan . Pre-tax treatment of employee contributions not only saves employee 's money , it reduces net taxable payroll which in turn lowers employer FICA matching expenses which is a further tax savings . For most individuals who purchase and pay for individual health insurance on their own there are none of these associated tax benefits . That is not to say that some individuals can not structure their business affairs to get some tax advantages in the individual marketplace but , after the ACA , our system is now set up to continue to tax favor group policies versus individual policies and to tax favor individual health insurance policies via subsidies up to certain income levels up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- .
The first place that you can check is Policy Locator Service through the Medical Information Bureau . MIB Group , Inc is a cooperative data exchange formed by the North American life insurance industry in 1909 . There is a cost associated with the search but it will return results via mail with a list of queries by insurance companies for underwriting on the search subject , from whenever they were `` shopped '' for insurance . Keep in mind , that this is not 100 % inclusive for all insurers . The search form is located here WEBSITELINK Secondly , through some sleuthing using either the above list or my following list of suggestions , you should contact the insurers on your target list , in order to verify the active policies . Where to search : - Credit card and bank statements : Go back through the insured 's financial records and look for periodic payments to insurers , whether it be on a monthly , quarterly , semi-annual or annual basis . This should indicate who the insurer is/was based upon where the money is paid to . - Banks , Credit Unions , Credit card companies : Often times , many banks , lenders and credit companies offer group policies for their account holders for as little as $ 1,000.00 of coverage and higher amounts based upon certain requirements . Check with these groups to see if they had offered any of these products at any point in time . - Pay stubs/Employers and Benefits companies : Many employers offer a basic life or AD&D policy to full time employees for free as well as inexpensive group policies . Deductions for the premium payments on the group policies may be found on the insured 's pay stub . However , many times , this coverage is only active when the insured is employed . - Split Dollar/Executive Compensation plans : Some employers taking advantage of tax regulations , used life insurance to pay benefits to key employees which may have also been part of Supplemental Exec Retirement Plans -LRB- SERP -RRB- . Verify with the insured 's former employers if any plan existed . - Unions , Pensions and Fraternal organizations : Many Unions and Pension funds may have a small paid-up policy on the insured as part of their benefits package . The same goes for Fraternal organizations including Knights of Columbus , Elks , Masons , etc. . Many times the search is no easy task however , after a bit of detective work and dedication , you may uncover a handful of forgotten or unknown small policies , where the cumulative benefit adds up and more than justifies the search !
Health insurance for small businesses is known as group health insurance and it works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan . There are different types of programs available for group coverage and each business may have a different tolerance for what they 're willing to take on in terms of price or what they 're willing to offer to their employees . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . So , in short , there 's really no way to say what group coverage costs without going through that input first to create the quotes . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , I recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is My Life Insurance Safe ?
Life insurance companies are highly regulated by the states in which they do business . Historically , life insurance companies have been very safe and very reliable for paying claims . There are also life insurance state pools that provide a safety net if a life insurance company would default on its contracts . Typically , if a life insurance company struggles , it is bought by another company and all the policy contractual agreements are honored by the new company .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
A Safe Harbor 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan generally satisfies the non-discrimination rules for elective deferrals and employer matching contributions . For a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan to be considered a Safe Harbor plan , employers must satisfy certain contribution , vesting , and notice requirements . So , let 's say you have 25 employees , but only a third of them choose to put money into the plan . There 's a formula that limits the amount you can personally contribute to a traditional , non-Safe Harbor plan . Under a Safe Harbor401 -LRB- k -RRB- , if you 're willing to make a minimum contribution on behalf of your employees , you 'll be able to maximize your own personal contributions to the plan .
If you pick a website that is safe , you will be safe buying life insurance online . Some things to look at to determine if a website is safe are : 1 -RRB- Are they part of the Better Business Bureau ? If so , how are they rated ? 2 -RRB- Do they have a lot of complaints ? 3 -RRB- Do they share information with other companies , or keep it private ? 4 -RRB- Do their testimonials sound legitimate ? 5 -RRB- Do they show their contact information ? Do they have a physical address ? 6 -RRB- Better yet , do they give any information about their management or employees ? 7 -RRB- Do they show what companies they sell for ? 8 -RRB- Do they provide educational information , or just push for a sale on their website ? 9 -RRB- Do you have the opportunity to talk to a licensed agent ? 10 -RRB- Can you wait to pay for the policy after you get it , or if you pay in advance , are you assured that you can get a refund if you choose not to take it ? If you go to the right website , you can get great service and never have to leave your home . Checking out the points above will help you have a good and safe experience .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
That is a great question , and one every parent asks , I think ! Here 's the deal . While we want to set our kids up so that they can be independent , there are some things that might not really be best to set up for them . Savings accounts , retirement vehicles , a credit card with low credit limits , and life insurances , those are great choices . Auto insurance maybe not so much . Here 's why : Your son 's age group is the highest at risk group for an auto insurer . As such , that means they are much more likely to have an accident , get a ticket , or cause major damage to themselves or others.That risk means that the insurer will hedge their chances of having to pay out by charging much higher rates for them . If he 's a safe and careful driver and the company offers safe driver discounts , he may come out ahead , but if there 's an issue , his rates would increase even higher . By putting him on your policy , he gets the advantage of better coverage than what he could afford , and lower rates , as he 's listed as a driver under your policy . If that 's affordable for you , perhaps it would work out better to keep him there until he moves away , or has a couple of safe driving years under his belt . That said , maybe the responsibility of having to pay for himself might be impetus enough to be careful and safe ... I hope that gives you something to work with as you try to decide . You know your son better than anyone , and I 'm certain that you will make the best choice for him . Thanks for asking !
Is life insurance a good investment ? Well , it depends on if it fits your risk profile . I consider whole life insurance to be a part of my investment plan as whole life insurance offers a safe rate of return , ca n't go backwards in a down market and protects my family if I die before retirement . My whole life actually protects in retirement as when I die . That said , you will find whole life is absolutely the most boring financial product ever . Simply it does what it says it 's going to do , with no surprises along the way . Other investments shoot up , shoot down , stay flat and even fail . All which makes for great conversations over a beer . Life insurance ? Well , very few people brag about steady .
Is Northwestern Mutual whole Life a good investment ? Well it depends on your needs . Your needs are what make any choice a good or bad investment . First Northwestern Mutual is a very highly rated fiscally strong company , as many others are . Using Whole life as an investment does work as part of an overall investment strategy as it provides a safe place to accumulate money as well as protecting your other plans . What you will find is whole life insurance is the most boring investment product out there . It 's not exciting , it 's not racy , it 's not an up and down product . It is a slow safe and secure place to put money out there . It 's boring because it does what it says it will do . I have owned whole life for almost 30 years and it has never let me down . Ca n't say the same about my real estate or stock market investments during that same window of time . Oh , last thing to keep it short . Whole life cash values do n't go backwards . You ca n't lose it once it 's there .
That is a great question ! I 'm not sure what annuity you have , or the details of it , so that 's a tough question to answer . If your cash flow is good enough that you do not need to touch the annuity for the length of the surrender period , then it is safe . If it pays you an interest rate that is higher than the inflation rate , then it 's safe . If it is with a reliable company that can afford to pay you out , then it 's safe . If you answered negatively to any of those things , then you may have trouble . If you 'd like to contact me with specifics , I can answer you a little better . Thanks for asking !
It is safe to say that based upon my 30 year experience in providing insurance solutions to my clients , I have never seen a situation where an incurance company did not notify the customer in writing that their coverage was to be cancelled . Whether a non renewal on a policy anniversary , a mid term cancellation or even a cancellation for non payment of premium , notification is sent to the insured well in advance to allow that person to either pay his bill or make other arrangements .
If you know the website is safe and you trust the life insurance company or agency then yes it should be safe . However , do you know if you are getting the right coverage at the best price for your unique situation ? If you have doubt , I highly recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker to shop the market for you . Almost all of us do that for free everyday .
Insurance providers will chose the option that costs the insurance company the least amount of money . But keep in mind it is in the insurance companies best interest that the car is safe and has no potential future costs that can come back on the insurance provider . So using the above example if a $ 8000.00 valued auto can be property repaired for $ 6000.00 then the insurance provider will fix the vehicle . If however it seems there are potential issues that can increase the cost and the vehicle can not be adequately repaired safely the vehicle will be a total .
I agree . The annuity is only as safe as the issuing company but there are guarantees built into the contract and the company . In our industry , we keep hearing that there has never been an annuity written that did not get paid . So safety then begs the question ; if my company goes into receivership , how much of my annuity will get paid out and what can I lose?That is a very good question for the broker you are working with because company safety is closely monitored by state regulators . When any company gets into financial balance sheet troubles , it is taken over by the state to ensure that policyholders will not lose their contracts to poor management or economic circuimstance .
This can be a really tough task , as I know you 're probably finding out . The first places to start are with their insurance agent and their financial advisor . That 's where most people purchase their life insurance and , if they 're good , they 'll have a list of their policies , even if they 're with another company . Be sure to ask them where they were insured before them , they may have purchased life insurance from a previous agent or advisor . Follow this trail back as far as you can . Also check with their former employer , they may have life insurance there . The other place to inquire is with the state insurance department . Some states will have information such as this . Check anyplace they may have stored documents : a safe , a file drawer , a safe deposit box , a storage unit , and , yes , the basement . Lastly , you can Google lost life insurance policies . There is so much information on the web , you may find something . Good luck , and keep looking .
Is variable universal life worth it ? It 's going to depend on the individual who purchases it . Variable Universal Life has many `` moving parts '' that require attention . This is not a purchase and put in the drawer policy . It requires `` management '' by the individual who purchases it . These policies may require rebalancing and/or changing funding options within the choices . Anyone who purchases a VUL should have a good understanding of investment risk and what it requires for the best possible outcome . For me personally , I am not a fan of VUL as I feel some things in a portfolio should be boring , safe and consistent and offer a reasonable return . I feel traditional old fashioned whole life offers that to an individual . It becomes a personal question of how much RISK a person should have . For me , my whole life respresents a boring financial product , one that did ` nt go backwards in 2008 , when all my exciting ones did . Personally , I want something that is steady , along with something else that has more risk but greater return possibilities . Again personally speaking , I do n't feel insurance should ever be an `` at risk '' product . Just me , old school , sorry .
How can annuities be used for retirement ? Well a couple of ways . First , annuities can be used for payouts . You can not outlive an annuity payout stream . An immediate annuity can provide a safe income stream while retired . Second , you can use a deferred annuity to safely continue to invest and grow funds to use at a later date .
A `` Safe Harbor '' retirement plan is one of the most popular 401 -LRB- k -RRB- retirement plans in the business community . Safe Harbor plans eliminate some of the administration hassles of adhering to IRS non-discrimination testing while maintaining the basics of a pretax defined contribution plan like a tradition 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan .
Li `` safe moneyfe insurance companies make money the same way your bank makes money . The insurance company uses actuaries to help them design their products to assure they are covering their costs plus sufficient profit . When you pay your monthly payment the insurance companies uses the services of an Investment manager to calculate their `` short term liquidity needs '' and then they invest the balance usually in bonds , especially for `` safe money '' companies that do not invests in stocks or other investments that carry a higher degree of risk
That is a great question ! The answer really lies with your level of risk tolerance and where your level of affordability lies . The higher the deductible , the cheaper your premiums will be , but if the deductible is set to a point where you could n't raise that amount in an emergency , then it 's not good either . You want to have a deductible that you can safely come up with , but yet allow you to safely afford the premiums . Thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! There are a couple of types of life insurance , each with certain functions , guarantees , and returns . The term policies are short lived , have a determined end date , and are very simple policies , with few frills . Whole life policies are a little more complex , but have sure guarantees of the payout , and cost of premiums . They are set , and guaranteed . Then there are the variable life policies . These are another type of animal altogether . They were designed to give the insurance consumer an option that was more like stocks or mutual funds in their ability to generate returns . The premiums are said to be `` flexible '' , because you can overpay , pay the suggested premium , pay less than the suggested , or skip altogether one month . The catch is that this type of policy works off of the cash you put into it , and the ability of your investment choices to generate a positive return . Since there are typically very few -LRB- if any -RRB- guarantees , the risk of the performance is yours , not the insurers . This policy can cost you money , and go belly up , if you are not a wise investor , and able to make larger premium payments when needed.I will be honest - I like my clients to keep their money , and add to what they have in a safe and secure way . I do not recommend these policies to my clients . I hope that helps , if you would like more details , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Does Hipaa Apply To Disability Insurance ?
Employer provided Disability Insurance is not covered under HIPAA . The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act was developed in part to simplify the health care system through electronic technology , yet protect the privacy of health information . The HIPAA Administration Simplification regulations exclude Disability Insurance because the benefit it provides does not fit their definition for a health plan . . As far as applying for a Disability Insurance policy goes , yes , your medical information privacy is protected by HIPAA .
Does Hipaa apply to disability insurance ? Not sure how you mean it , but in some ways yes it does . The insurance company that you are applying to will have you sign off on a HIPAA form that gives your permission to the insurance company to contact your doctors and other medical services to gain information for underwriting purposes . As far as the insurance companies themselves , they have always operated under privacy laws set up by their industry . The HIPAA form is a bit of a redundancy as it applies to insurance .
Employer provided Disability Insurance is not covered under HIPAA . The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act was developed in part to simplify the health care system through electronic technology , yet protect the privacy of health information . The HIPAA Administration Simplification regulations exclude Disability Insurance because the benefit it provides does not fit their definition for a health plan . . As far as applying for a Disability Insurance policy goes , yes , your medical information privacy is protected by HIPAA .
Does HIPAA apply to life insurance ? Yes , HIPAA applies to the life insurance process in the form of a medical information release the applicant signs off on that acts as a HIPAA document that is presented to doctor 's offices and hospitals and other medical information resources to gather health history on the applicant .
Yes - life insurance companies can check medical records when you apply for coverage , regardless of whether you 're applying for a fully underwritten program or a no-exam life insurance program . The reason they can do this is because you are granting them access when you apply for coverage by signing a HIPAA authorization form . HIPAA was created to help protect the confidentiality and security of healthcare information . The HIPAA form authorizes the carrier to obtain needed medical information for the purposes of underwriting your program . Typically , the carriers may only order a copy of the records when you apply for a certain level of coverage or length of coverage because of the expense involved in doing so . For small policies -LRB- e.g. $ 25,000 , $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 , etc. -RRB- , carriers will generally feature more relaxed underwriting and have fewer requirements . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your program or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
HIPAA applies to life insurance in that the medical information you share on the application , the results of your paramed exam , and any medical records that are ordered are kept private from anyone except the agency that orders them and the life insurance company that reviews them . Your information is never shared . The Medical Information Bureau does put a code on your MIB to represent any existing health conditions that showed up as a result of your applying for Life Insurance . This is to help prevent multiple fraudulent applications by those who are attempting to use Life Insurance for illegal purposes .
A life insurance application is a form divided into sections . The first section asks your personal information , such as name , date of birth , address , etc. . The next section usually asks about the policy you are applying for - face amount , how you want to pay the premium , etc. . Then the application asks about your risk factors : whether you smoke , participate in dangerous hobbies , your health issues , etc. . If you are applying for a simplified or guaranteed issue policy , the questions about risk will be fewer or nonexistent . There will also be some supplemental forms for medically underwritten policies , such as the HIPAA and HIV forms which give your consent to be tested for HIV and for your medical records to be reviewed by the insurance company . Again , if you are applying for a nonmed policy , there is no need for medical exam . But for larger face amounts or very competitive pricing , this type of testing is usually required .
Whether or not an insurance company will look at your psychiatric records after seeing a grief counselor for four years will partly depend on the type of policy you get , and the face amount . If you are applying for a small nonmed , final expense policy , it is doubtful that your psychiatric records will be reviewed . The exception might be if you had a hospitalization for depression , suicide attempt , or went on Disability for depression within recent years . Even then , there are some policies that will cover you without review of your medical records . Others will be more investigative . If you are applying for a medically underwritten policy of a face amount over $ 250,000 , and if you are also on medication for depression , I anticipate that many companies would order your psychiatric records . Some wo n't . If they do , they are bound by HIPAA laws to keep them confidential , and simple grief counseling that has not caused hospitalization , suicide attempt , or disability will usually not interfere with your ability to get life insurance . Using an experienced impaired risk life insurance agent who is able to choose the best policy from among many companies will be your best option , especially if you desire that your records not be reviewed .
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 -LRB- commonly known as HIPAA -RRB- protects patients medical information in that your personal information can not be shared with another party without your authorization . The other aspect of HIPAA that most people are familiar with is COBRA . COBRA allows you to continue employer coverage for a while after your employment has terminated . Under the affordable care act , coming off of group coverage does grant you a special enrollment period as it 's a qualifying event so you would want to compare options between COBRA and plans available on the individual market - an experienced health insurance broker can help you with this . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! Not only can they , but they absolutely do . In almost every policy that you apply for will be a paragraph or clausethat states you agree to giveyour consent to the companies search of your medical history and prescription records . It typically will have a waiver for two years of your HIPAA rights , and will tell you that an inquiry will be made to the MIB -LRB- medical Information Bureau -RRB- . This is done to protect them from people that may have forgotten their health history , or that may be less than honest in their answers when applying . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
HIPAA , the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act addresses benefits provided by an employer group health insurance plan . HIPAA addresses issues such as PHI -LRB- protected health information -RRB- and how that information should be communicated . The best known of HIPAA provisions address the portability feature that allows employees to continue coverage under the employer group health insurance plan when they are no longer an active employee . HIPAA does not specifically address group life insurance .
HIPAA covers a lot of ground including PHI -LRB- protected health information -RRB- and numerous regulations governing those who have access to PHI and how that information may be transmitted . The best known provision in HIPAA is the COBRA law that allows employees -LRB- and their dependents -RRB- to continue their employer group benefits after they have terminated employment . Individuals with severe pre-existing conditions should consider exercising their COBRA option to avoid being uninsured . Other individuals and family members should explore individual major medical options .
If you are applying for a policy with a company that does medical underwriting , and have a health condition for which they need additional information , the insurance company can request to see your medical records . There is usually a HIPAA form included with the application for you to give your permission , and some doctor 's offices require that you sign a separate form for release of your records to the life insurance company . If you do not have a health condition for which extra information is needed , the insurance company will not look at your medical records . That incurs a cost to them , so they only do so if necessary to issue you a fair health rating .
Although unemployment does not technically offer health insurance , there may be other valid options , including : 1 . COBRA continuation of coverage , which the unemployed person recently had on the prior employer 's group plan . 2 . HIPAA portability coverage 3 . Medicaid for those with low income , for which the unemployed person may qualify 4 . A private insurance policy , known as an Individual / Family plan 5 . A private short-term policy to cover the gap between jobs , or the new-hire waiting period imposed by the new job . 6 . A conversion policy , in some circumstances 7 . Options in various states for high risk pools or guarantee-issued coverage . It is important for you to consult with an expert insurance agent/broker in your state , because acceptance of one of these options may disqualify you for another one . It is important to know your rights to coverage , the eligibility rules for that coverage , and the timeframes and deadlines that apply .
Can life insurance companies access your medical records ? Yes , as when you apply for life insurance you grant them permission to do so . It is part of the application process and the applicant will also fill out a seperate form that gives HIPAA premission to get copies of your doctors notes .
Yes , life insurance companies access medical records with your permission . Depending on the size of the policy and company requirements , medical records may or may not be required for your policy . When you apply for life insurance , there is a HIPAA -LRB- Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act -RRB- , which provides permission for the insurance company to obtain and view your medical records . The medical records , along with a prescription check , MVR records , and exam are used to determine your eligibility for life insurance .
HIPAA does apply to life insurance as the insurance company will be seeking personal medical information about the applicant and must have written authorization from the applicant in order for any medical records to be released . Doctors offices and hospitals following HIPAA guidelines will not release any medical history without written consent from the individual whose records are being requested .
Each carrier 's application is different , but you can generally expect to find the same types of sections on each including : 1 -RRB- General information section -LRB- e.g. name , address , social security number , phone number , occupation , etc. -RRB- 2 -RRB- Plan Information -LRB- where you enter in what coverage you want to apply for -RRB- 3 -RRB- General information questions 4 -RRB- Health information questions 5 -RRB- Trust information -LRB- if applicable -RRB- 6 -RRB- Replacement form -LRB- to be used if replacing existing coverage -RRB- 7 -RRB- Authorization forms -LRB- including HIPAA forms , Blood test form , etc. -RRB- 8 -RRB- Supplementary Forms -LRB- e.g. foreign travel form , medical condition specifications , alcohol/drug usage , tobacco usage , etc. - generally only needed for certain histories or if requested by the carrier -RRB- . I always recommend to my clients to let me go through the application with them to make sure everything is in good order so you do n't have to redo any paperwork or chase down clarifications later .
HIPAA will play the same role as it did prior to the new affordable care act . It will still protect patients medical information and COBRA coverage will still continue under the existing structure -LRB- helping youto continue employer coverage for a while after your employment has terminated -RRB- . Please note , under the affordable care act , coming off of group coverage does grant you a special enrollment period as it 's a qualifying event so you would want to compare options between COBRA and plans available on the individual market - an experienced health insurance broker can help you with this . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance underwriters can check medical records . Unless you have a chronic condition , most life insurance companies do not regularly check medical records due to expense . They do regularly check your pharmacy records and MIB to verify your answers on your life insurance application . None of this is done without your signing a HIPAA form on the application and the insurance company adhering to HPAA guidelines .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Do I Know If I Need Medigap Insurance ?
That is a question only you can answer . Consider this . Medicare has two parts . Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Medicare only pays about 80 % of the cost of your care , you pay the other 20 % . Your financial responsibility is unlimited . If you are comfortable with paying large deductibles for hospital admission and 20 % of outpatient charges you may not need a Medigap plan . The per admission Medicare Part A deductible is $ 1184 . The Part B annual deductible is $ 147 followed by 80 % coinsurance . -LRB- Medicare pays 80 % , you pay the balance -RRB- . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Medigap Plans are standardized by CMS . This means they are Medicare 's plans and NOT plans of the insurance company -- so there is n't a company that ranks as the best Medigap carrier because they are all required to pay the bills ... it 's the law . As a consumer , it 's in your best interest to use an independent agent to help you determine which insurance company and Medigap Plan is the best for you . Independent agents specializing in Medicare know how to research the market and find the insurance company that meets your needs . When I 'm helping Seniors lower their existing Medigap premium , I let them know that it really does n't matter which insurance company they use ... if they have Plan F , it will be the same exact Plan F with another insurance carrier . The only difference is the price . Thank you for taking the time to read my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
Effective . Hmmm . After 32 years in the business , I believe -LRB- I hope ! -RRB- I 'm effective in how I service and explain plans and create and manage the websites I own . But ... if there was one feature that I believe makes myself effective ... is simply listening . I need to know what my client needs and how he hopes to achieve that . By listening instead of talking , I 'm always able to provide the best possible product for their unique situation . Yes ... after 32 years in the business ... I still listen !
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have cancer ? Well , it depends upon a lot of questions . The type of cancer diagnosed , the date first diagnosis occurred . I need to know was it treated by surgery , chemotherapy , radiation therapy , hormonal therapy . I 'll also need to know , enlist the stage of the cancer , as well as the grade of the cancer . I need to know also , has it spread to other parts of the body , because that 's going to be issue for us to be able to underwrite . And then the last one is has there been proper follow ups to your cancer ? Which is CT scans , X-rays , bone scans , laboratory work . I need to know those kinds of things to accumulate enough information to give you the proper offer . Remember , certain carriers are more benevolent in certain types of cancers than others .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
As a big do it yourselfer , the answer is maybe ? It depends on what your situation is and how adept you are on gathering information and making a good decision from all the information out there . I mean I like to work on my cars and trucks . I can do many things myself and feel really good about it . However , I do still use my trusted mechanic for the things I simply am not good enough to do myself and that way I avoid putting my family at risk . As another noted , there are absolutely no price savings in going without an agent . The laws in most states prevent any discounting for doing it yourself . It never ever hurts to become informed about a product . I have taught my son the doctor , how to frame a house , wire a house and have a general understanding about construction . He 's a doctor now , and yes , that is fun to say , he has learned enough about how to build that when he decides to build , he can have a good conversation with a builder and know when to call shenanigans or not . By all means it pays to educate yourself , but understand that an open mind is required to educate yourself .
Medigap is health insurance sold by private insurance companies . Each insurance company has it 's own set of Medigap premiums . These premiums are usually based on the Medicare recipient 's zip code , age and tobacco status . Cost of your premium will also depend on which Medigap Plan benefits you want to buy . The best way to see how much a Medigap Plan will cost is to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . In just a matter of minutes , we can provide you with the insurance companies and premiums available in your area -- and , not just with the insurance carriers you see online . Once you have quotes tailored to your criteria , you 'll know exactly how much Medigap insurance will cost . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Owning A Home Affect Car Insurance ?
Yes and no . I said no because owning a home does not make you a better or worse driver . So , when actuaries are going through and determining premiums for losses and gains they will probably not give any significant weight to owning a home . I also said yes because if you group your home and auto together most insurers will give you a multi-policy discount . This is just a discount for doing all your business with one insurance company .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
most companies give a 25 to 30 % discount on the home and 5 to 10 % on the auto policy if you place both polciies with the same company . We can thank Progressive and Geico for this discount as these carriers only want the customers auto insurance . In the past year or so both companies have partnered with a home insurance carrier to bundle .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
There are many factors that affect the rates for homeowners insurance : Homeowner -LRB- insured -RRB- - The insured 's age , credit rating , loss experience , prior coveragewill affect the premium charged for a homeowners policy . Home location - Location is a very big deal . For example , a home located on the coast will be subject to a much higher premium compared to the same home located far inland due to the increased possibility of loss from wind or storm damage . Likewise , a home located in an area that has excellent fire protection -LRB- very close proximity to a fire station -RRB- will have a lower premium than the same home located in a secluded location very far away from fire protection . Home Construction - A stick-built wood frame home is more expensive to insure than the same valued home constructed of fire-resistive materials due to the increased potential for catastrophic fire loss with the former . Coverage Limits - Obviously a $ 500,000 home will cost more to insure than a similarly located/constructed $ 200,000 home .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Term life insurance does n't affect financial aid . Life insurance owned by a trust and out of the estate does n't affect financial aid . However if the cash values of a personally owned life insurance policy are cited as an asset for personal bank loan purposes or business loans , it could be construed as a cash asset and may be characterized as an asset for financial aid means testing .
Nowadays , car color does not have an affect on the cost of auto insurance . The things that will affect the amount you will spend are age of driver , residence location , driving history , insurance history , type of car , age of car , and cost of car . This is a very generalized list I gave you , and there are many other factors that go into the cost , but these are the most basic ones . I hope this helps you to better understand how the cost of auto insurance is formulated . Thanks for asking !
Divorce does affect life insurance but maybe not in the way you are asking your question . It does not affect your premiums or cost but it will affect other aspects of your policy . The first thing that needs to be addressed is the beneficiary . You may not want your ex to receive your life insurance proceeds . Next aspect to be examined is your face amount . Now that you are on your own , do you have the proper amount of life insurance for children , loved ones to cover debt , etc. ? Last is the term or type of policy . Are the premiums guaranteed for the proper amount of time ? I recommend sooner rather than later sitting down with your agent to address these needs before it becomes too late .
There are various factors that are included when an insurance company files pricing with a state 's Insurance Department . The obvious factors have to do with a driver 's record of accidents and infractions . Many companies have also determined that one 's credit standing can be a measurable factor when calculating the rate one would pay for car insurance . The car itself has a great deal to do with a policy 's pricing with regard to both Comprehensive and Collision , but Liability as well . Think of the kind of damage that can be caused by a large sized SUV vs a sub compact car . Finally , the coverage chosen directly affects the amount you pay . If two people live next to each other , own the very same make and model car , have a clean record and are insured by the same company , neighbor A is paying less because he is only carrying the state minimum requirement for liability coverage , while neighbor B is paying more because he has chosen the more complete protection offered by higher liabillity coverage limits . These are just a few examples of factors that affect the price you pay .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
The cost of insurance on a leased car will typically be the same as an owned car . Basic insurance rates are not affected by whether a vehicle is leased or owned . There may be endorsements that are available for a leased vehicle as opposed to an owned vehicle . Contact a local agent to discuss your insurance wants and needs .
The first thing you need to do is look at your coverage . Part `` A '' is your dwelling coverage which means your home . Make sure that your home is valued correctly . Some carriers use replacement cost so you need to make sure that you are no over insured or under insured . Also make sure that they have the correct property address . I had a client come in who had a policy on a home that was very high and after looking at the papers the carrier had been insuring the wrong home for 6 years Many times a Mutual carrier will be less depending on the type of home and the area you live in . In many cases they are less because they are no affected by natural disasters from other states which can affect everyone premium . In some cases this year alone I have seen Rates double with some carriers that had many claims from other states and here in Montana the mutual companies are less because they are all Montana based only . Shop around and most important is to make sure that you are covered properly . In the even of a total loss being insured for the wrong valuecan be a HUGE problem
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
If the title of the car is placed in your name , then you must carrier your own insurance , normally . Some insurance companies , for example Safeco and others , will not allow you to be on another policy if you live in the same home . If you live in the same home as your mother , you might be able to have both your own policy and still receive the discounts that come with your mom 's policy . For example , Allied allows all household members to be listed on separate policies -LRB- like your mom and you since you have your own titled auto -RRB- , but gives you a multi-car discount , etc. . What is so important is that you tell your insurance company up-front know that she does n't `` own '' the car , some companies can just reference her name as having an insurable interest in the car . Just tell your agent up-front . If something happens , and you discussed it with him/her it is his/her responsibility to insure it correctly/accurately .
No , owning a motorcycle does not affect life insurance . The only time motorcycle riding affects policy rates is if the motorcycle is used in racing or stunts . Then the policy can be rated up with table ratings , have a flat extra added to it , or possibly the application can be denied coverage .
If your question is what affects the stability of life insurance rates , the answer is , not very much . Life insurance rates are based on multiple millions of lives and death rates are predictable . A dramatic change in the financial markets could affect life insurance rates if the companies can not earn the necessary returns to maintain their promises . A dramatic epidemic could affect rates . Recently rates were affected by regulation . These changes are generally small .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Medicare Part F For ?
Medicare has 4 parts . Medicare Part A is the hospital portion , Part B is for outpatient care . Medicare Part C is an Advantage plan and Part D is for outpatient prescription drugs . Perhaps you mean Medicare supplement plan F ? Supplement plan F covers 100 % of approved Medicare A and B charges .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Plan F is your `` cadillac '' plan -LRB- so-to-speak -RRB- because it provides the most comprehensive coverage and is the most popular Medicare supplement plan . Like other Medicare supplement plans , it covers basic benefits for medical and hospital expenses this plan will pay the remaining portion of whatever Medicare does not pay for medical and hospital charges as long as the charge is approved by Medicare . Ideally , this plan will benefit people who want to have the peace of mind in knowing that all of their Medicare approved charges will be covered - in short , you 're writing the check for your monthly premium and you 're done . You can add a Part D plan to provide coverage for prescriptions . Medicare Supplement Plan F covered benefits include : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Medigap plan F is the most popular Medigap plan you can buy because it 's offers the most comprehensive coverage . It covers all 9 Medigap benefits at 100 % from day 1 . The 9 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan -LRB- known as Hi-F or High-F -RRB- it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a High-F plan , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the plan pays anything . The benefit of the High-F plan is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium than a regular plan F. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is The Best Health Insurance In Kentucky ?
This question can not be answered without more detail . Where you live , the health services you use , and what providers you prefer must be taken into account . While the Kynect exchange is the easiest in the country to use , the number of options available requires a great amount of research or knowledge to truly find the best coverage for an individual . A navigator or connector can provide information , but only agents and brokers can recommend specific policies , and there is no additional cost for this service . You can find navigators , connectors , and agents by clicking on the Assistors button at the top of the page within Kynect .
In addition to the other information , it 's important to know that if the policy was replacing other coverage when it was issued , some states do not allow a new contestability period beyond what the replaced policy had . Kentucky for example would not allow a company to not pay a claim if someone committed sucide a week after buying the policy IF it replaced an existing policy that had been in force for over two years . The new policy is non-contestable from the first day up to the face amount of the old policy . It 's very important in Kentucky to make sure you receive a copy of the replacement form and keep it with your new policy . Most states do not have this added protection but if your does , it can make a huge difference with your insurance claim .
Kentucky does not charge income tax on life insurance benefits if they are left to a person , rather than the estate . If life insurance goes through probate , it will be taxed . Life insurance benefits are charged Kentucky inheritance taxes , with varying degrees of exemptions given to different types of heirs . They are also subject to federal estate taxes if of a sufficient amount , and in the estate of the last remaining spouse .
Life insurance proceeds that are left to a beneficiary are exempt from creditors in Kentucky , as long as the beneficiary is not a co-signer to the insured person 's debt . If the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is the estate , creditors can go after life insurance proceeds upon the insured person 's death .
When states try to be unusually restrictive they often penalize the insurance consumers in that state . For example , a few states do n't allow different rates based on gender . When that happens , most life insurance companies simply charge females the male rates . It penalizes the females around 20 % compared to what they pay in other states . New York 's restrictive requirement on insurance companies raises a lot of money for the state but greatly limits the consumer choices to just a few . Many products are not available to them that they could buy if they moved to any other state . Kentucky 's law about no new contestable period on replacement policies does protect consumers but it also causes some companies to choose not to offer products in that state . State insurance laws can be a double edged sword .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
The penalty is $ 500 or more plus court costs for a first-time offence . Court costs are often between $ 150 and $ 200 dollars . In addition to the fines for driving without insurance , the state of Kentucky can cancel your car registration if you do not have insurance . Insurance companies provide a list of insured drivers to the state . If the state does not receive notification that you have insurance for 60 days , they will send a notice to provide evidence of coverage . If you do not provide evidence of coverage within 30 days , your auto registration may be canceled .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
Most states are not no-fault states . However , there are a handful of states that are considered `` no fault . '' Based on my 32 years of experience in the business -LRB- and I do make mistakes ! -RRB- , I believe these states are no fault . But you can always check with the State Dept. Of Insurance to verify : Pennsylvania Florida Michigan New Jersey Utah Minnesota North Dakota Kentucky Massachusetts Hawaii Minnesota New York
This is a Good Question . Typically if your card is not automatically sent to you 3 months before your 65th birthday , you can apply online at the social security or Medicare site , you can also go to your local social security office . If you are working still , you may be able to defer part B . If you are in the Illinois , Kentucky , Arizona , Florida , Hawaii , Michigan , Montana , New Mexico or Wyoming , you can contact me ; otherwise contact a broker in your area to help you with all your options .
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
WellPoint Health Networks , Inc. merged with Anthem where the name WellPoint , Inc. was adopted . WellPoint is an independent company of the BCBS Association . WellPoint is nowthe largest managed health care company in the Blue Cross and Blue Shield family association serving California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indian , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia , Washington D.C. , and Wisconsin . It operates under other names in the mentioned states as Blue Cross , Anthem and UniCare .
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
The answer has two distinct parts to it . Part One : You can only purchase life insurance on someone you have an `` insurable interest '' in . This means you have some financial interest in them continuing to live . Such as a spouse , a child , a business associate , or some relative with whom you may be in some manner financially associated with . Part Two : Not everyone can have life insurance , except for the `` Guaranteed '' type insurance , which is for relatively low amounts of death benefit , and a relatively high premium . This may come through a group plan or a general advertisement.For the other types of life insurance , your health will be checked , unless you are a member of a group doing open enrollment , where the premiums are averaged out among sick and healthy members . After a health check , the company will make an offer of what they will charge and what death benefit they will offer . You may not get what you hoped for . Your best bet is to do everything you can to make sure your health exam will find you in the best health possible . Do not lie . They will find out . The company with the lowest rate is not always the one with the best coverage . Keep the reputation of the company in mind . Always best to go with the best life insurance company you can find who will cover you . Gary Lane 9497972424 .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
What will disqualify you from life insurance ? Well depends on you mean by disqualify as there are many forms of life insurance out there at many different price levels . There are guaranteed issue plans , credit life and a few that will insure a person for a very high premium . What you might be asking instead is what will disqualify you from the best possible rates for life insurance ? Your health is what will get you very good rates or high rates if your health is poor . There are also possible issues with travel , credit and occupations and hobbies . But , the best price is usually tied to best possible health . You are your discount .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
I suspect you are asking about `` supplementary '' insurance . Secondary insurance is a term associated with when a person is covered under 2 different health insurance policies . Most commonly when a husband and wife both work at different employers and one or both are enrolled in their employer 's health plan and are covering their spouses as dependents . In this situation the two policies will `` coordinate benefits '' and one policy will cover what the other does not . But there is really no `` best '' in this situation , it 's just whatever coverage the other spouse has . Supplementary policies are numerous and varied and are offered by a growing number of insurance carriers . Some supplementary policies are specifically designed to cover health insurance plan deductible and other out-of-pocket expenses . Others can be targeted for specific situations such as cancer and critical illnesses . The sad fact is that there is no objective measure that can tell you what the `` best '' supplementary policy is for your specific situation . Some consumers will associate lots of advertising and the branding of a certain aquatic fowl with being the best . This may or may not be true . Seeking out the advice of an independent health insurance agent would be in your best interest if you are in the market for supplementary coverage . Agents tied to one specific insurance company can only show you that insurance company 's products and so their objective will be to fit your needs into their box whether it 's the best fit for you or not .
There is no one national `` best of breed '' when it comes to heath insurance . Health insurance is driven at the state level and therefore varies greatly from one state to the next . Even products and rates from the same national insurance carrier will vary from state to state . People 's definition of `` best '' vary from person to person as well . For some it 's the plan with the lowest monthly premium cost for others it is the plan with the richest level of benefits . In that sense , only you can determine what private health insurance plan in your state are the best fit for you . I would recommend you seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is certified to sell health insurance both on and off of the government health insurance marketplace to help you determine what the answer to your question is for you specifically .
Interestingly enough , I am often asked the question , what is the best life insurance ? There is however , no overall best type that provides all solutions . What is best for you depends on your circumstances and what you want to accomplish . Universal life because of the flexibility is considered by many to be the `` best '' . Whole life and term products could also be the `` best '' , again depending on the circumstances and what you wanted to accomplish . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How To Pick Renters Insurance ?
While the companies vary , the real choice is among the agents . A trusted agent is a good listener , a wise counselor and an honest advocate . If you dont have an agent , get a recommendation from a friend , colleague or neighbor . Listen carefully to the advice the agent provides . When you receive your policy make sure that it is what you wanted . In this process dont overlook the need for adequate limits . The worst policy is the one that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
I 'm glad you asked this question . I wish more people would before they listen to someone tell them that the lowest price is the best . Nothing could be further from the truth . For a very reasonable and affordable premium , you can get renter 's insurance that works right for you . First , pick the right limit for your personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- . there are some great tools to help you estimate this and the number 's bigger than you think . One of the best is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Next , pick the right settlement option . Actual Cash Value -LRB- ACV -RRB- : The insurance company will depreciate everything you lost and write you a check for that amount up to the policy limit . Replacement Cost : The insurance company will pay to replace the stuff you lost with new , up to the policy limit . I usually sell replacement cost because most people would rather have new stuff . Keep in mind , if you choose replacement cost , your limit should be higher than if you choose ACV . Make sure you have broad form or special form coverage on your personal property . This will ensure you have coverage for theft . Lastly , pick the right liability limit . If an agent tries to sell you a liability limit of $ 100,000 , run away and find a new agent . If you get sued , it will likely be for a lot more than $ 100,000 . Here 's the worst part , the premium difference between a limit of $ 100,000 and $ 500,000 could be as low as $ 9 per year -LRB- that 's what it is with my company -RRB- . The most important thing you should know is that a good agent will take the time to find out about you and the things you own . Then , he/she will put together the right coverage to protect you . If it costs a little more , pay it . An extra $ 50 premium might save you thousands at claim time .
Renters Insurance polices have a coverage called loss of use or additional living expense . How this coverage works is : If there was a covered loss such as a fire for example that caused you to move out of your residence , because the residence became unlivable due to the loss then your renters policy under the additional living expanse coverage would pick up the Hotel for temporary housing until you were able to move back in .
Renters insurance covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- and personal liability -LRB- if someone sues you -RRB- . You should make sure that you pick the coverage amount for Personal Property that will replace all the items in your possession including ; clothing , beds , furniture , electronics , eatery etc. . Keep in mind that expensive items like jewelry , furs , fine arts , silverware , money & securities will all have limits unless scheduled on the policy with an appraisal . A renters policy is a great value for the amount of premium paid . Unfortunately many renters go without it unless required by the landlord .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
Five easy steps : 1 . Pick a face amount . 2 . Pick a premium to pay . 3 . Pick a period for which you need coverage . 4 . Meditate a bit on this : these three elements are interconnected . If you alter one , it will affect the others . For example , if you reduce the amount you pay , you could reduce both the face amount , and the period for which the coverage is guaranteed . 5 . Go ahead and live your life . Its a product that can be manipulated as your life circumstances change . But make sure you consult with your representative every time you want to make a change in the policy . Make informed decisions .
You will usually be required to take her off of your policy and have her pick up her own . Sometimes a judge will require you pay for your ex-spouses insurance , in which case she would need to pick up her own policy . Check with your insurance company to be sure how they would handle your individual situation .
You select how long you want your long term disability policy to work when you buy it . You can pick it to last a number of years , or you can pick it to last to age 65 . The length of coverage and elimination period will affect the price you pay .
Term insurance is often the best value in a specific set of circumstances . These are : You need life insurance for a limited amount of time ; You want to pay as little as possible for that coverage ; You have no need for the advantages of accumulating cash inside life insurance . Lets suppose you have a personal loan such as a mortgage , or a bank loan for your business . You need life insurance to cover those liabilities . You have other policies in force to take care of your family and your estate . So , you pick up a term policy to cover that specific need . Maybe you unfortunately are getting divorced , and the decree requires a policy for a set amount of years . Or , you start a business with a partner , and you need to fund your buy-sell agreement up to a certain age . So , you pick up a term policy . Lets suppose you have a disciplined savings program and are accumulating wealth in a number of vehicles . You have many investments , and they range from aggressive to conservative . No real need to use life insurance to grow cash . But you do need coverage . So , you pick up a term policy . In these cases , permanent , cash value insurance might be overkill . You dont have to spend extra money in premium for a long-term guarantee you dont want , and for cash you dont need . Just make sure you know what youre doing , because if it ends up that you do want life insurance after the term policy renews , all bets could be off . The price could be high , and you also run the risk of not being insurable . Bear that in mind .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
Renters insurance does not cover damage to vehicles . The vehicles insurance would cover what ever damage occurred . There is a slight possibility renters insurance would cover damage to a vehicle if for example you threw a baseball through the glass but even this on is a maybe . The vehicles comprehensive coverage would pick up this kind of damage .
When buying Disability insurance you need to consider how many years you want it to last , how many months you want to wait from incurring the disability until you receive the first payment -LRB- elimination period -RRB- , and how much of your income you want to replace . You need to consider features like whether it will pay if you are able to go back to work but not are not back up to your old wages -LRB- residual disability -RRB- , whether it will pay if you can not perform your own occupation , and whether it has a cost of living rider . Finally , you need to consider your budget and how much of the above you can afford , then pick out the features that are most important to you .
You sure can toke and get life insurance ... . kinda ... Do n't take all our answers as a 100 % YES that you can ... . Since the time of the last posts , a LOT has happened politically around the subject of weed . Some life insurance carriers have lightened up on their guidelines as well . If you like a little bud from time to time , HERE ARE THE TIPS I have wen looking for life insurance : 1 -RRB- BE UPFRONT . You 're going to have to pee in a cup and donate a little blood . So do n't lie . Tell the agent you smoke !! 2 -RRB- Be honest about how much & how often . How much and how often is very important when picking the right carrier . If you have any more questions , reach out !! - gravy
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
The next open enrollment for Medicare is October 15 to December 7 , 2013 . This is the fall open enrollment for 2014 . At this time you can change your Medicare plan , pick a new Medicare Advantage Plan , or pick a new drug plan . Call 800-MEDICARE for advice and information on what you would like to do during the next open enrollment period .
A Medicare voucher system allows Medicare beneficiaries to pick their coverage from a variety of options . In reality , a voucher system is no different from the way you pick plans now . Medicare beneficiaries can opt for traditional Medicare or may use taxpayer dollars to fund at least a portion of the cost of a Medicare Advantage plan .
Most people who are self employed need to pick up an individual policy . This would be considered a self employed health insurance policy . There is no set difference or requirements between a person who is employed and has to pick up his own insurance or a self employed person . There could be a difference as far as tax being deductible since a self employed person will usually file a Schedule C . An HSA qualified plan is a great way to purchase health insurance if you are self employed due to the tax advantages . Ask your tax adviser .
When you first enroll in Medicare Part B you have 60 days to pick a Part D drug plan . If you have a drug plan that is part of a Medicare Advantage plan , and you lose your Advantage coverage -LRB- such as moving out of the service area -RRB- you have 60 days to pick a new plan . Part D annual enrollment runs from October 15 to December 7 .
The best Medicare supplement plan is something you will have to decide on your own . Medicare supplement plans are standardized . Medicare supplement plans are assigned a letter from A to N and each plan has specific benefits as set by Medicare . Plan F is the most popular plan . All plan F 's are identical in every way except for price . Over 90 % of my clients want value and pick a plan OTHER THAN plan F . You should pick a plan that fits your needs and budget .
end question
start question
annuities
How Are Distributions From Nonqualified Annuities Taxed ?
Non-qualified tax deferred annuities accumulate tax deferred . The distribution of gain in an annuity is taxable as ordinary income at the effective tax bracket rate of the annuity owner . The basis , or original contributions , are distributed tax free . The long term tax deferral for on-qualified tax deferred annuities can have a significant financial impact .
The premiums paid constitute the basis for the annuity . Income tax has been deferred on the earnings of the annuity . The first withdrawals from an annuity are considered earnings and are taxed as ordinary income . If this withdrawal is prior to age 59 the earnings are subject to a 10 % penalty . Once the earnings are exhausted the basis is returned tax free . If the withdrawals are in an annuity only a portion of the withdrawal is taxed as earnings .
Generally speaking , if the annuity is nonqualified , the beneficiary of an annuity will pay taxes on the earnings . The basis , or monetary contribution that purchased the annuity , is not taxed . How the beneficiary is taxed depends on whether they receive the annuity in a lump sum or whether they annuitize it -LRB- take periodic payments -RRB- . If the annuity was tax qualified when purchased , taxes are paid on both the basis -LRB- original contribution -RRB- and the earnings .
In qualified retirement plans , it may make sense to annuitize the annuity before required minimum distributions become mandatory . In nonqualified retirement planning strategies , you may want to use the staggering annuity product tactic called annuity laddering to maximized tax deferral and utilize the combination of different annuities along you retirement timeline .
Is a variable annuity a security ? Yes , a variable annuity is subject to the same rules and oversight of the SEC that a security would be . A person selling variable annuities must be securities registered and comply with all the transaction rules established by FINRA and the SEC . One other thing to think about if you 're considering a variable annuity is that the RISK in type of product is more along the lines of a stock purchase than a nonqualified product like a fixed annuity .
Bank owned life insurance -LRB- BOLI -RRB- allows banks to obtain better after tax return on assets than tier 1 capital . The bank is owner and beneficiary of the life insurance , not bank executives . Regulations have tightened in recent years and banks must have a legitimate reason to own life insurance on the lives of highly compensated executives of the bank . BOLI is usually set up to informally fund nonqualified benefit plans for selected executives . The executive is an insured in these policies but has no ownership interest . The executive 's family not a beneficiary of the policy though the nonqualified benefit agreements may have death benefit provisions which are income taxable to them unlike a life insurance policy death benefit . Though not BOLI , split dollar arrangements have reemerged which can overcome most BOLI shortcomings and allow both the bank and the executive to directly participate in and benefit from a life insurance contract .
How are annuity gains taxed ? Well , depending on how you funded the annuity and how you choose to distribute from the annuity the answer and be part of the distribution to all of the distribution . If you use qualified money to fund your annuity , you 've skipped paying taxes on those funds . This means when you have the funds distributed the entire amount is taxable . If you paid taxes on the money used to fund the annuity , you only pay taxes on the gains liquidated . The distribution is basically split in half for tax purposes . One thing as you consider distribution from your annuity . . only the money actually taken out is taxed , so taking funds out on a regular basis means you only pay taxes on what comes out of the policy .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com . Today 's question is : is a single premium annuity a good investment ? Well remember , generally these are interest driven products and single premium annuities could be a period certain . It could be ten years certain . It could be 20 years certain or one of the most popular out there right now is you 're actually purchasing a lifetime of income with a single premium immediate annuity . If it 's nonqualified the money which you originally put into it called basis comes out blended with the gain on this , so there 's a little bit of a tax advantage there . Remember , you ca n't outlive this , so if you become the Guinness Book of World Records or you 're one of Willard Scott 's people who turn 100 every day , you 're going to get that payment and it 's there for the rest of your life . A lot of people like immediate annuities to be the underpinning or their foundation of their retirement . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
A life insurance retirement plan is a nonqualified , tax deferred cash value accumulating policy . To maximize the accumulating cash values , the policy must be designed with lowest cost of insurance death benefit option non modified endowment contract . The contract death benefit and death benefit options must be managed throughout the life on the insurance to minimize the cost of insurance . There are several crediting methods available depending upon your risk tolerance . If the contract is designed correctly , the policy can generate tax free withdrawals to basis and policy loans of gain as long as the contract is kept in force for the life of the insured .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
Section 457 plans are nonqualified deferred compensation plans available only to state and local government employers , and nongovernment organizations exempt from tax under IRC Section 501 . Generally 457 plans are utilized for two reasons - 1 . As deferred compensation plans that allow participants to reduce their taxable salary in a manner similar to that of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans . 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans generally are not available to state and local government organizations . 2 . As supplemental benefit plans that provide executives with supplemental retirement income .
Cash value life insurance products are frequently used as a retirement planning vehicle . Most nonqualified retirement plans , from the largest to the smallest companies in America , use life insurance to informally fund the retirement payments companies make to their retiring executives . So , it would stand to reason that what works for those arrangements can work for individuals , too ! With the right products , an experienced life insurance professional can design a supplemental retirement plan using life insurance to provide income in retirement , tax free -LRB- through policy loans -RRB- . Whole life is not always the best choice in terms of efficiency and flexibility . Universal life based products are better , in my experience .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
The service addresses both ERISA qualified plans and other nonqualified supplemental retirement plans . Assuming this question is addressing ERISA qualified plans , there are several retirement plans such as the popular 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- and 412 -LRB- i -RRB- as well as others such as cash balance plans defined benefit plans , defined contribution plans , profit sharing plans .
No , the retirement plan offered by the military is not qualified . Public sector pension plans are not covered by ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- , and in order for a retirement plan to be qualified , it must meet the regulations set forth by ERISA . Therefore , the military 's retirement plan offered through the federal government is nonqualified .
Company owned life insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is taken out on key employees in the company . The company is the owner , payer , and beneficiary of these policies . If the key employee should pass away , the company has funds to recruit a new employee to replace them and to carry on operations during that transition time . If the Corporate Owned Life Insurance is a cash value policy . it can be used as an informal funding vehicle for a nonqualified deferred compensation -LRB- NQDC -RRB- plan .
Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is life insurance that a corporation takes out on the lives of one or more employees , with the benefits payable to the corporation or the employee 's families . COLI can be structured to fund certain types of nonqualified plans , such as split-dollar life insurance that allows the company to recoup its premium with part of the death benefit and the rest of the death benefit going to the employees ' beneficiaries . Many corporations these days use COLI to insure key employees , with the corporation receiving the death benefit so they can find and hire a new employee , or as part of a buy-sell agreement so they can buy a partner 's share . of stock .
The corporation is either the total or partial beneficiary on the policy , and an employee or group of employees , owner or debtor is listed as the insured -LRB- s -RRB- . Fundamentally , COLI differs from group life insurance policies that are typically offered to most or all of the employees in a company , because this type of insurance is designed to protect the employees and their families and not the company itself . COLI can be structured in many different ways to accomplish many different objectives . One of the most common is to fund certain types of nonqualified plans , such as a split-dollar life insurance policy that allows the company to recoup its premium outlay into the policy by naming itself as the beneficiary for the amount of premium paid , with the remainder going to the employee who is the insured on the policy . Other forms of COLI include key person life insurance that pays the company a death benefit upon the death of a key employee , and buy-sell agreements that fund the buyout of a deceased partner or owner of a business . In many cases , the death benefit is used to buy some or all of the shares of company stock owned by the deceased -LRB- such as with a closely-held business -RRB- . COLI is also frequently used as a means of recovering the cost of funding various types of employee benefits .
While the answer is - `` YES '' , you can combine annuities - it is important to bear in mind that some annuities have different tax treatment than others . My advice is to only combine annuity money of a similar nature with that of another . For example , an IRA -LRB- individual Retirement Account -RRB- provides a deduction on the IRS 1040 against income . Because of this feature and tax benefit , all money coming out of an IRA , both interest and basis , are taxed as income upon distribution . In other words , because of the tax deduction , distributions from an IRA are taxed as if all the money coming from the account is being taxed for the first time . An ordinary tax qualified annuity , a non-IRA annuity , incurs taxation only on the gain at the time of distribution . This exclusion formula recognizes that some of the money deposited was already taxed as ordinary income when you first earned it and this money will not be taxed again at distribution . That is why I suggest honoring the character of the money and keeping IRA 's with IRA 's , etc. . This simple rule of thumb will help relieve you of explaining years later the source or the money and help you argue successfully that some money should not be taxed . Who among us will remember 30-40 years hence how these accounts were merged ? There are a whole other set of rules for conversions and methods to avoid taxation prior to annuitization and the beginning of the payout period of your annuities . This answer covers general theory only on the idea you want to minimize taxation to the largest extent possible .
When are annuities taxable ? Annuities are taxable during the distribution phase of ownership . While in the accumulation phase an annuity does offer protection from current tax liabilities . Taxes are deferred to the distribution phase at the normal income tax rate bracket you retirement income may fall into . Depending on how you funded your annuity , a portion or all of the distribution could be taxable income . Please note : you only pay taxes on the amounts withdrawn from an annuity during distribution phase . So taxes are due over the years rather than at one time .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Giving My Life Insurance Policy Away To A Charity A Good Idea ?
The idea of giving life insurance proceeds to your favorite charity can be a noble idea . If there are no loved ones or business interest that would suffer a financial loss at your death , a charity can be a wonderful idea for these tax free proceeds . Be sure and seek advice from your attorney or speak to the charities accountant department to be sure you list the beneficiary properly on the policy to help them avoid unnecessary taxation of the charity . Congratulations on your noble idea .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question is : is giving my life insurance policy to a charity a good idea ? Well , first of all , do you have a charity that qualifies as a non profit under the IRS rules ? Second of all , is this a charity that you want to see go into perpetuity ? Third of all , if your contract is existing and you really do n't need it anymore , you do n't need it for yourself , you do n't need it for you beneficiaries , maybe your children or grandchildren , you could gift your policy to the charity . Some people will also write a policy on themselves from day one and have the charity own it . It really depends upon what you 're trying to get done , but if you 're trying to see your organization go into perpetuity and you no longer need an existing contract , this is a really good option for you to look at . A charity , you can gift your life insurance to the charity of your choice , and just make sure that it 's IRS approved . Well , that 's our consumer question for the day . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question is : is giving my life insurance policy to a charity a good idea ? Well , first of all , do you have a charity that qualifies as a non profit under the IRS rules ? Second of all , is this a charity that you want to see go into perpetuity ? Third of all , if your contract is existing and you really do n't need it anymore , you do n't need it for yourself , you do n't need it for you beneficiaries , maybe your children or grandchildren , you could gift your policy to the charity . Some people will also write a policy on themselves from day one and have the charity own it . It really depends upon what you 're trying to get done , but if you 're trying to see your organization go into perpetuity and you no longer need an existing contract , this is a really good option for you to look at . A charity , you can gift your life insurance to the charity of your choice , and just make sure that it 's IRS approved . Well , that 's our consumer question for the day . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The idea of giving life insurance proceeds to your favorite charity can be a noble idea . If there are no loved ones or business interest that would suffer a financial loss at your death , a charity can be a wonderful idea for these tax free proceeds . Be sure and seek advice from your attorney or speak to the charities accountant department to be sure you list the beneficiary properly on the policy to help them avoid unnecessary taxation of the charity . Congratulations on your noble idea .
I am working on a case right now in which my client has applied for 11 policies . Here is the breakdown : He is a partner in one business with two other fellows . They have just completed a buy-sell agreement and are funding the agreement with life insurance . Per the advice of their accountant and their attorney , they are purchasing several policies to cover both the current and the anticipated future value of the business . One policy will be owned by the business , and four other policies will be owned by a trust . That gives us five policies so far . My client is also a partner in a second business , with another fellow . They are following the same funding strategy . That business will own one policy , and the trust will own an additional four . Our count is now up to 10 policies . But these policies take care only of business needs . My client is also married with children . He needs life insurance for family protection . So he is purchasing yet another policy for their benefit . That gives us 11 . The underwriter is fine with this set up . My client can justify the need for all policies financially . All policies have been deemed appropriate with regard to the financial needs of the business and the financial needs of his family . And you know what ? He could buy more if he wanted to . Lets suppose he supported a number of charities . They could be religious , or social service , or political . He could take out a separate policy for each of their benefit . Five charities , five more policies . But we have another consideration . What if his net worth is over $ 5 million , and he wants to preserve his estate for his heirs ? What if he wants to avoid forcing his family to liquidate his assets just to pay Uncle Sams estate tax bill ? He could buy life insurance to cover the tax bill . Another policy . We are not done yet :-RRB- . What if his parents were financially dependent on him . It happens . What if his premature demise would put them in financial straits ? He could buy life insurance on himself for their benefit , so they could be well taken care of . Do you realize that in this scenario , this one client could take out 20 or so policies ? And it would all be financially justified and appropriate . How do you like that ? Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
If you have no ongoing financial liabilities or those liabilities are already covered with an existing policy -LRB- s -RRB- , youre done for all practical purposes . However , many consumers like the idea of making a difference in their favorite charities , children and grandchildren . But if thatis n'ta desire andyou ` vecovered all you financial liabilities , you can put your check book away .
To pay off debts that are left after they pass away . To leave a legacy . This could be to provide money for college for niece 's , nephew 's , grandkid 's , or other siblings . To provide for their favorite charity after they pass away . They may not remain single before they pass away . Remember the younger you are when you purchase life insurance coverage the lower the cost .
In addition to the wonderful answers given by Carl , I would add that people who are looking for permanent coverage also benefit from whole life insurance . Whole Life stays in effect for your `` whole life '' , whereas Term Life only stays in effect for a `` term '' of a your life . So anyone who wants to use their life insurance for funeral expenses , passing their inheritance to their children , giving to a charity , or other purposes that will not go away after a `` term '' of time , can benefit from Whole Life insurance .
You dont have to bother if you dont have to . At least in this country for the time being , life insurance is not something that the government forces us to buy . And I hope the day never comes , because it would really mess up the life insurance marketplace . So the purchase of life insurance is voluntary . Who , then , should buy it ? If you are a billionaire , should you buy life insurance ? Sure you should . Lets suppose your estate would owe the government $ 100 million in taxes when you die . To pay this fee , your heirs might have to liquidate a bunch of businesses and buildings and other assets . They would then pay the bill dollar for dollar . Or , you could buy life insurance and pay the bill for pennies on the dollar . And keep all your assets intact as an inheritance for your heirs . Not only that : lets suppose you started a foundation to eliminate world hunger or some other noble cause . Lets suppose you wanted to leave the charity $ 100 million as a gift when you died . If you bought a life insurance policy and left that to the charity , you would only have to pay a few cents in premium for every dollar a benefit . You would have that much more money left over for other good causes . A very good use of your money . Now , lets suppose youre not a billionaire . Should you buy life insurance ? Heres the question : do you have a more economical way to take care of your family ? They have become dependent upon you . Why force them to reduce their standard of living when you die ? You could start putting money away into a fund . But what happens if you tragically died next year ? Would you have really accumulated enough money to let them live their lives ? Life insurance would provide them with all the money they need as soon as it is needed . No other financial product comes to the rescue like that . Why not die looking like a hero , as someone who cared and took measures to provide for his love ones ?
Life insurance is a superb tool for making your mark on the world even after you pass away . Lets suppose youre a family-first type of person . Your spouse , your kids , your grandkids mean everything to you . You want all your assets to go to them - the house , the business interest ... all the stuff you have built and accumulated and enjoyed throughout your life . If you dont take proper precautions , Uncle Sam could grab a good chunk of that when you die . But if you plan properly , it can all go to your family . And life insurance can take care of Uncle Sam . Putting life insurance in place could enable you to keep all your assets intact for posterity . And it could help you satisfy your estate tax obligations for pennies on the dollar . It is a good deal . And you know what else you could do with life insurance in your estate planning ? You could make significant donations to charity . Because the premiums are so low compared to the benefits , you could spend not a lot of money but have a huge impact on the good work of your favorite nonprofits . Think about the difference you could make in the world by helping your favorite religious/political/social / medical research group . Perhaps you could fund the research needed to in eliminate cancer . For good . All with a life insurance policy included in your estate !
Your comment made me laugh ! And yes , I can answer your great question like a five year old , I 'm a master of simple ! An annuity is a way of putting money aside now to spend later . You get them through insurance companies . Once you put the money in it , you should n't touch it . It sits for many years growing and waiting for you . Once you get old and need it , you tell it you are ready to get paid . It will then start paying you every month until you a. -RRB- use it up b. -RRB- pass away or c. -RRB- your surviving spouse passes away -LRB- you pick one when you get it -RRB- . They are a way of making sure you have money during your retirement . They are not a good idea for everybody - -LRB- like riding a bike without training wheels for the first ever bike ride -RRB- some people have trouble with their bills , and setting aside lots of bill money could be a bad thing , so they have to do what is called a ` suitability study ' first . It will help figure out if it is a good thing . If the person you talk to does n't do one , they are bad - run away ! And some of them are filled with hiding fees and costs , that eat away like bad bugs at your money while it is away , so you have to be careful and ask ` pacifically what the costs are in total for the annuity . If it does n't cost too much , it is a good thing . There are lots of types , so ask about all of them and take notes before you even think of giving them your money , k ? I hope that helps , please realize that is greatly simplified . But the bottom line is that the right annuity can be a great part of your retirement plan . Please feel free to contact me for more details , or to answer any lingering questions , okay ? Thank you for the ` funnest ' question I have ever gotten to answer here !
One of the benefits of life insurance is a tax free death benefit to the beneficiary . The beneficiary does not have to worry about creditors , probate , and nobody has to know your the one who received the insurance funds . Life insurance is a great addition to your portfolio . Debt and taxes are usually the biggest concerns a family will go through when a love one passes away . But the best thing we can do is prepare for the future . Their are several life insurance products that can give you the best estate planning advantages . Are you thinking about leaving money to a charity , church , grand children , non for profits . Learn about all the tax advantages that are available to you .
It is a contract with a charity in which the charity will agree to pay a certain amount of money , normally monthly , to one or even two people , during their life . This will be done in return for cash or property given to the charity . These plans permit a person to pass assets to a charity while insuring them of a stream of income . The stream of income is guaranteed by the full assets of the charity .
It was designed to allow everyone to chip in and help the elderly afford health care that they otherwise would not receive . It is unfortunate that so many of the retirees -LRB- there are about 10,000 seniors turning 65 every day -RRB- are unprepared for retirement , or are finding that an unexpected illness requiring long term care has eaten away at what was to have been their retirement fund . Without the safety net of Medicare , they would either have to do without , or receive what free care was available . -LRB- And by free , I mean paid for by all the rest of us through higher hospital and doctor fees , because you know they are n't charities . -RRB- It is a sad truth that approximately 60 % of worldwide bankruptcies are cause by medical emergencies . -LRB- Even with health insurance . -RRB- If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to give you more detail , Thanks for asking !
The amount of life insurance any person needs depends on your obligations and on your desires . You would want to have at least $ 25,000 for your burial or cremation and service , paying off bills , and payment for someone to handle your estate . If you have a mortgage and would like to give your home to a friend , relative or charity , you could purchase life insurance to pay off your mortgage . You could buy life insurance to leave any amount of money to a charity . A good place to start is using a life insurance calculator such as you find on lifehappens.org . The calculators can jog your memory as to what needs to be covered and help you determine how much coverage to purchase .
Permanent life insurance is a good idea when the death benefit is to be used for funeral costs , when the insured is using life insurance to pass their estate to heirs , when leaving money to a charity , or other purposes which require that the life insurance is in effect at the time of the insured person 's death , even if at a very old age . Permanent life insurance must be used if the desire is for the policy to build up cash value , or if the policy owner wants to have a reduced paid up policy if they ever stop paying premiums .
Financial Planning is a process that provides a client with impartial assistance in analyzing and organizing personal financial affairs in order to achieve financial and lifestyle goals in a tax effective manner . Estate Planning is Financial Planning starting with the end in mind . The principal objective of estate planning is to ensure that your property is managed most efficiently during your lifetime and that your wishes are carried out most effectively after you die . Life insurance can be used in numerous ways to help you achieve your estate planning objectives . In fact , there are too many to be completely covered here , so I will provide a few examples to give an overview . Life insurance can be used to create an estate -LRB- wealth -RRB- : - Cash at death to retire your debts - Leave your survivors with a home - An income for your family - An emergency fund - An education fund - and more Life insurance can be used to conserve an estate : - Cash at death to pay the tax and estate fees and avoid a bargain estate sale . An example would be that bills are due at death and your assets are in bricks and mortar . In order to generate cash , your heirs may have to sell at a loss to pay taxes and other bills . - Cash at death to provide for favourite charity . - Cash at death for estate equalization , you want to give a fixed asset to one heir and to be fair , provide cash to another . - Business life insurance to protect an important asset . There are a number of additional strategies available that use life insurance to conserve or increase the value of your estate and to provide you with living benefits as well . It all depends on your individual objectives . There is additional information on Estate Planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A Charitable Annuity is a Charitable Gift Annuity , an insurance product used estate planning for those benevolent grantors who have charitable intentions and seek tax advantaged income . It involves a contract between a grantor/donor and a charity . The grantor gifts cash or other assets to an IRS approved nonprofit charity , receives for a partial tax deduction and a lifetime annual income from the charity . When the grantor/donor dies , the charity keeps the gift .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Is Life Insurance Not Taxed ?
In general terms , the death benefit proceeds are paid to the beneficiaries of life insurance policy tax free . There may be some tax exposure in business and estate scenarios . But the government made a decision quite some time ago that life insurance presented a social good that warranted the tax preference .
As best as I can understand it , the core reason for not taxing life insurance is that the tax perks give people an extra reason to buy the product . Free money , has quite an appeal . With an income tax free benefit and the potential for tax-deferred cash growth and tax-free distributions , life insurance represents a lot of free money . It is very much in the government self-interest to have people purchase life insurance . Think about how high the demand for government benefits would be if families did not have private money to sustain themselves when a dear loved one was lost ? How about all the businesses that would fail with the subsequent increase in unemployment if businesses didnt sure against the loss of partners and key employees ? And dont forget all the charities that do tremendous political , spiritual , medical , and civic work for the nation . If you reduce the amount of life policies that are gifted to these groups , many would have a very hard time surviving .
When Congress created an income tax in 1913 , it exempted life insurance because life insurance was seen as a safety net for widows and orphans . Life insurance has expanded in its uses since then , from protecting businesses if a key employee dies , to being part of a financial plan for high wealth individuals . But at its core , life insurance protects people and businesses from financial loss as a result of death . And death is still one area that people hate to see exploited .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Why use an irrevocable life insurance trust ? The main reason is to transfer the asset -LRB- life insurance is an asset -RRB- out of the direct ownership of the insured . Why ? While life insurance is income tax free in most all situations , it is not estate tax free when adding up all assets subject to estate taxes . For a person who may have an estate tax liability , an insurance trust makes good sense . Making it irrevocable just clearly makes a line of separation from the policy owner and their other assets .
In Canada , immediate and deferred annuities are , with one exception , taxed on an accrual basis . The growth or income is taxed as earned , not as received . How the income is taxed , depends , if it is interest income or , in the case of Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , interest , dividends or capital gains . Prescribed Annuities enjoy special taxation -LRB- Section 304 of Income Tax Act -RRB- . They are taxed on a straight line basis rather than on an accrual basis . If you qualify for a prescribed annuity then total amount of `` expected '' interest is averaged based on the number of payments . For example invest in a prescribed life income annuity and your `` life expectancy '' is 22 years . The amount of investment DIVIDED BY `` life expectancy '' EQUALS return of your principle and it is not taxed . The annuity payment SUBTRACT the return of your principle is taxable . The tax savings can be substantial , which is why prescribed annuities are often used to increase after tax income . Especially for those who prefer guaranteed interest income . A life insurance policy can replace the capital for your estate . Depending on the the individual circumstances , increases of after tax income can be 50 % or more . Implementing a strategy involving payout annuities is sometimes complicated , it is however , always permanent . Search for Retirement / Financial planner in your area . Then look for an experienced life insurance broker with a professional designation such as a CLU or CFP . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please contact me .
Well , Yes and No . You can always deduct your individual health insurance premiums on your Schedule A , Itemized Deductions , on your income tax form along with other eligible medical expenses . The catch is -LRB- there always is one is n't there ? -RRB- that you have to itemize your deductions -LRB- which you are probably doing as a self-employed person -RRB- and that thanks to ObamaCare your total deductible medical expenses now have to exceed 10 % of your income before you receive any tax benefit . This is generally a pretty high bar to clear for most self-employed people and so the net effect for most self-employed persons is that they receive little or no tax benefit . But as some politicians seem to like to point out , you did n't really build your business . So , why should you get a tax break ? And someone has to pay the taxes to provide for the subsidies for other people 's health insurance or Medicaid coverage . We all know that everyone who owns a business is rich so why not you ?
Why is whole life insurance bad ? Because I have something else to sell you or I have n't actually reviewed whole life because I am too lazy to learn about it as a product . Or my favorite , since the IRS created the MEC provision back in the 80 's which created a situation that if you put too much money into a policy , the tax advantages changed . Up until then , your local neighborhood stock broker would sell you life insurance as an investment as it 's qualities were very attractive to investors . Besides common sense tells me that insurance companies price their products based on the risk they bear providing insurance in every and I mean EVERY product they sell . Why would whole life be different ? Why would it be the `` only '' product witha higher price that is `` bad '' for the insured ?
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
While the answer is - `` YES '' , you can combine annuities - it is important to bear in mind that some annuities have different tax treatment than others . My advice is to only combine annuity money of a similar nature with that of another . For example , an IRA -LRB- individual Retirement Account -RRB- provides a deduction on the IRS 1040 against income . Because of this feature and tax benefit , all money coming out of an IRA , both interest and basis , are taxed as income upon distribution . In other words , because of the tax deduction , distributions from an IRA are taxed as if all the money coming from the account is being taxed for the first time . An ordinary tax qualified annuity , a non-IRA annuity , incurs taxation only on the gain at the time of distribution . This exclusion formula recognizes that some of the money deposited was already taxed as ordinary income when you first earned it and this money will not be taxed again at distribution . That is why I suggest honoring the character of the money and keeping IRA 's with IRA 's , etc. . This simple rule of thumb will help relieve you of explaining years later the source or the money and help you argue successfully that some money should not be taxed . Who among us will remember 30-40 years hence how these accounts were merged ? There are a whole other set of rules for conversions and methods to avoid taxation prior to annuitization and the beginning of the payout period of your annuities . This answer covers general theory only on the idea you want to minimize taxation to the largest extent possible .
Why invest in whole life insurance ? Well it is one of the few insurance products that you actually control , not the insurance carrier . That is a big reason why whole life insurance is expensive compared to other life products . The insurance company bears the risk of the contract as they can not alter or change the terms of the contract , they can not raise the price of the policy in later years and must receive the policy owners permission to do anything to the policy . What a whole life offers is a decent return for the safety it provides the policy holder . There is very little investment risk to a whole life policy compared to other places where a person can put money . This also is reflected in the return . If you had money invested in 2008 you learned first hand about investment risk . That said , while the rest of my investments were losing 40 % my whole life gained value . You ca n't go backwards with a whole life which makes it a good part of anybody 's planning . I call whole life the most boring investment a person can make . Why ? it does what it says it will do .
Paid up life-insurance means you dont make anymore payments on the policy . You still get the coverage , but you no longer have to pay for it . But heres the question : suppose you wanted to keep paying ? Why wouldnt the insurance company allow you to do so ? I mean , some of these permanent insurance policies can get very cash rich . Whole life policies can pay some pretty hefty dividends . Universal life policies can apply a pretty decent interest rate . As I am sure you have heard , there can be some great tax advantages to accumulating wealth inside life insurance : tax-deferred accumulation , and , under the right circumstances , tax-free distributions . So why wouldnt an insurance company just let you go for it ? A number of decades ago , they did . People were taking out policies with face amounts of $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 , but putting huge amounts of cash into them . Huge amounts . They really milked the tax advantages of the product . Of course , the IRS got wise to this and imposed certain rules . These rules limit the amount of money that can grow inside these policies and still avoid taxation . You can exceed this limit , but then you get a tax bill . From this point of view , paid up means if you put more cash into the policy , you could create a taxable event . It also means something else , in consideration of the expenses of the policy . Lets say you take out a universal life product with a guarantee to age 100 . This means that given the proper payment schedule , both the premium and the death benefit will be guaranteed to a age 100 . The emphasis is on the payment schedule . If you meet it , then no more payments would be required to secure those guarantees . It would be paid up . Whats interesting here is that , depending on the product , a lot of flexibility exists for designing a payment schedule . You can have continuous pay and simply pay the lowest amount required annually . You could have a single pay in which just one payment in the first year will get you what you want . You could have a 10 pay , which means you just pay for 10 years - and still get the guarantees . You could have 20 pay . And so on . Depending on your cash flow and other factors , you could pay up your policy with any number of strategies . And then you simply would not have to worry about paying for your life insurance , even though you would have the coverage for as long as you need . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why is whole life good ? Well there have been several answers that will cover the bases pretty well . A locked in premium , tax deferred growth , a death benefit that grows over time , etc. . Let me give you another reason . a reason that you may not realize until later in life if something happens to you but does n't kill you . That 's right people get sick . Diabetes , high blood pressure , heart problems and so on can and actually do happen to a large segment of our population . The reason I want to point out pertains to the things I just mentioned . Why is whole life good ? Because they ca n't take it away from you . YOU control the policy . The price ca n't go up , the policy ca n't really run out of years and end prematurely . Why is that important ? When I got sick with my type II , hyper tension and recently AFIB , what a reassurance it was to KNOW I was still in control of my policies , that they were n't going to end or explode in price on me . Whole life is expensive because it 's a product the INSURED controls . Cheers .
A tax deferred Retirement Plan is a plan that allow the grow to accumulate tax free while it is inside the plan and taxed when it is withdrawn . This tax deferred growth provides a significant advantage over plans that are taxed each year . Why ? Because you get the full effect of compound interest . In Canada , a Registered Retirement Savings Plan RRSP -RRB- not only offers tax deferred growth , it also offers -LRB- subject to limits -RRB- tax deductibility of contributions . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
When is not necessarily the best question to ask as to why to buy whole life insurance . If you know why you are purchasing insurance , that will help to determine your when . Most whole life policies pay out very little in dividends so I would look at other vehicles if you want dividends . Also , life insurance isa tax free vehicle when it pays out so consider that when you are looking at life insurance . To get to the root of the answer , most people purchase Whole Life policies as final expense policies because there is n't much of a reason to purchase Whole Life policies otherwise . The interest rate is dismal , dividends are not worth mentioning . The cost of a whole life policy can be affordable as to building up the savings or investment vehicle versus on your own . So , I would not purchase a whole life policy prior to age 50 .
Regardless of what type of insurance , if you 're asking why it 's priced the way it is , the answer is always this : it 's based on the actuarial data . Why is life insurance less expensive for women ? Because the data shows they live longer than men . Why is short term insurance less expensive ? Actually , I do n't know the specific actuarial data , but my guess is that the likelihood of your using insurance within 6 months is far less than if you had the insurance for many years .
Why not buy whole life insurance ? Well , you know you 're right , why not ? It is the only policy you actually control , they ca n't take it away or price you out of it . They ca n't make changes without your permission , they ca n't really do anything because you control the policy . That is why whole life is more expensive than other types of coverage . The insurance company is giving up control to the insured , so would they price that low or high ? There are a ton of other reasons as well , but I want to keep this brief .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is Trade Car Insurance ?
Trade car insurance is also known as temporary trade-in car insurance . This is a type of auto policy that is designed to provide short-term coverage when you are between vehicles . However , rather than thinking of it as a separate type of auto policy , think of it as a regular policy with a shorter life , much like a short term or temporary health insurance policy that only covers you for a brief , predetermined number of days . Depending on the state you reside in , and how vehicle registrations are handled in your state , trade car insurance may not even be necessary or available .
Very rarely will a reputable car dealership even let you leave the lot with out proof of insurance that is full coverage . Even if you traded in your old car with a new car and the old one had full coverage on it you have limited coverage for the new car with some carriers it will only cover the amount of what the value was for the old car you traded in . I would recommend always prior to even shopping for a car you shop for the insurance rates on the new car and make sure you are properly protected .
Trade car insurance is also known as temporary trade-in car insurance . This is a type of auto policy that is designed to provide short-term coverage when you are between vehicles . However , rather than thinking of it as a separate type of auto policy , think of it as a regular policy with a shorter life , much like a short term or temporary health insurance policy that only covers you for a brief , predetermined number of days . Depending on the state you reside in , and how vehicle registrations are handled in your state , trade car insurance may not even be necessary or available .
I love this question ! I have clients right now who pay more for collision coverage than they could ever collect on a total loss . It make no sense at all , it 's just what they 've always done . There 's a loose formula that I use in advising my clients about insuring an older vehicle . Look on KBB.com or Edmunds and get a rough idea of what your car is worth . Do n't use the `` clean retail '' . That 's completely unrealistic . Use the average trade or rough . It 'll be closer to the truth . Also check autotrader to get a range of what the cars are being listed for . Once you have a pretty good idea of what your car is worth , compare it to the cost of your physical damage coverage . If the cost of the coverage is more than 10 % of the value , you might consider dropping the coverage . That means that , in about 2-3 years , you 'd spend more than the value of the car . If you do have an accident , you get to make the decision on whether to repair the car or replace it . You 've already saved enough to do either -LRB- if you have n't spent your savings -RRB- . Bottom line , be aware of what your vehicles are worth and act accordingly . Spending money on coverage that would n't pay much does n't make a whole lot of sense . That 's not your agent 's place to decide for you , but we deal with it a lot and can make a suggestion . Find a good agent you can trust and go through the process . You 'll save money in the long run .
Most auto dealers will not let you drive the car off of the lot unless you have proof of insurance if there is a loan on the car . It is never a good idea to drive a car without insurance . If you traded a car in , then the coverage on the older car may extend to the new car temporarily , but you need to call your agent as soon as possible and get it changed . Most dealerships have an insurance agent they work with who can get you coverage as well .
What are the trade offs in selecting disability ? Well this may be hard to answer because with most disability plans if you 're working with a good agent you can build a disability policy to be exactly what you want . I guess the trade off is paying for what you select .
New York Life is not a publically traded company . New York Life is a mutual company . This means their policyholders are owners of the company versus publically traded on the stock exchange . Some types ofNew York Life whole life policies even allow voting rights and dividends for the policyholders . There are both plus and minus to mutual companies versus publically traded companies .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
There is no one best life insurance policy in the USA . That is like asking what is the best car in the USA . The type of life insurance -LRB- or car -RRB- that people buy depends on their budget , what they are using it for , what company they like , and whether they want to keep it for a long time or trade it off in the near future . A good life insurance agent will gather your personal health details , financial information , and desires , and find the best policy for you as an individual person .
Auto gap insurance is designed to reimburse you for the difference in the current value of the car and what you owe on the car , in the event there is a total loss . Since a car rapidly depreciates after you make the purchase , it is very possible -LRB- especially with little or no down-payment or trade-in -RRB- , that you will have this `` gap . '' Typically , the cost is not very expensive , and it can be taken out at the time you purchase the vehicle . You can also purchase a gap policy to cover your deductible , which will reduce your out-of-pocket costs . As an experienced car insurance broker , this coverage is often discussed with our customers . You can often buy coverage from your broker , lending institution or dealership .
Assuming you are talking about individual major medical insurance purchased after January 1 , 2014 , I think it comes down to some basic questions such as ; 1 -RRB- Do I qualify for a subsidy of my health insurance if I purchase it through the government health insurance marketplace ? The answer to this question may help you determine if you wish to purchase your coverage inside or outside of the government marketplace . In many areas of the country you will have more insurance carrier options outside of the government marketplace . 2 -RRB- Affordability - with or without a subsidy , what does your personal budget allow you to spend on health insurance premiums each month ? 3 -RRB- Plan Design & Cost Sharing - you will see a bewildering array of plan designs , many of which will look quite different from what you may have seen in the past . Terms such as Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum will need to mean something to you as they denote some basic levels of coverage and what you might anticipate in paying out of your pocket before your insurance benefits begin to pay . Bronze plans will offer the lowest monthly premiums but they will almost universally require you to pay a substantial deductible -LRB- perhaps $ 6000 + -RRB- before anything other than preventive care is covered . The trade off for a lower monthly premium can be more than offset by paying out of pocket for doctor 's services , inpatient & outpatient services and prescriptions . You will have to make some judgment call as to what you anticipate your health care consumptionwill be and how much up front financial exposure you are willing to take . If you are dealing with a chronic medical condition like diabetes you may be better served to pay a higher monthly premium for higher level plan designs that offer copays and lower deductibles . 4 -RRB- Provider Network - are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in the provider network for the insurance plan you may be interested in ? This is an especially sensitive area to women and one where you really need to do your homework . If you are purchasing coverage outside of the government health insurance marketplace you can be pretty confident that the providers the carrier says are in-network really are . There has been no small amount of confusion on this issue with some of the insurance plans offered in the government health insurance marketplaces . Also , you are more likely to encounter `` skinny '' networks in the government marketplaces than outside of them . The insurance products using skinny networks will generally be among the most attractively priced but the trade off is a significantly reduced provider network and possibly an environment more centered around Physician Assistants and/or Nurse Practitioners . 5 -RRB- Prescription Formulary - this kind of goes along with the points I was making above but it deserves special attention . You should not assume that every insurance carrier or even every insurance plan option offered by the same insurance carrier will cover the specific prescription medications you use . Every carrier uses prescription formularies -LRB- lists of approved drugs -RRB- and they can vary widely in what they cover , at what level they cover it , and possibly what steps you may have to go through before a specific medication would be approved for coverage . If you are using specific prescriptions you would be wise to verify their coverage status with a potential carrier before you enroll with them . 6 -RRB- Does Your Coverage Extend Beyond Your Local Area & Does it Require a Primary Care Physician Referral in Order to Visit a Specialist ? - some plan options may be restrictive as to the geographic boundaries of your coverage and may provide little or no coverage outside of their `` service ' area . If you are the stay at home type this may not be an issue for you but if you travel a lot is may be a serious factor in your decision . Also , you should not assume that you can just go directly to any specialist -LRB- even if they are in-network -RRB- without a referral from your Primary Care Physician -LRB- PCP -RRB- first . Some plans require a referral from a PCP to access specialty care . Without such a referral in these plans you may find your claim denied or treated as an out-of-network claim . You need to determine if the health plan you are considering uses such a gatekeeper approach and decide if this is acceptable to you . If you can do all these things then you will be well positioned to find a health insurance plan that best fits your needs . If you feel you are not equipped to find the answers to all these questions on your own then you should seek out an independent insurance broker to guide you through this process .
Securities Investor Protection Corporation is involved with traded securities . A fixed annuity is not a traded security . A fixed annuity is a contract between you and the insurance company . Your state insurance commissioner works to make sure that the insurance company keeps all of its promises .
Term life insurance is n't necessarily better than permanent life insurance - each has their own pros and cons . In short , it depends on what you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. covering a mortgage vs. estate planning -RRB- . The big advantage of term insurance is you 're getting more `` bang for your buck '' so-to-speak - meaning the rate per $ 1,000 of coverage that you 're paying is much less than permanent coverage , however , the trade-off is that you only get to pay that rate for a short amount of time -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- whereas your rates can be locked in for life with a permanent insurance policy . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the policy changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an independent insurance agent/broker to determine what policy benefit structure will best serve your needs , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . You can send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like assistance with your program .
There are many factors that contribute to car insurance rates . Experience is one of them but it is n't weighted as heavy as other factors such as credit , driving history , and claims history . Another factor that will weigh heavy on rating would depend on if you are getting insurance for the first time because you just purchased a car or getting it for the first time while owning a vehicle for an extended period of time . As long as you can show proof -LRB- i.e Bill of Sale -RRB- that you made the car purchase without a trade in , most companies will not apply a tremendous surcharge . I recommend that you shop around because every company is different in their standards . I would stick with face-to-face quotes so you can ask all the questions that you have on your first insurance purchase . insurance is one of the few things that a human will outsmart a computer at anytime .
A variable annuity like a fixed annuity allows the owner to accumulate money on a tax deferred basis . Both types of annuities allow the owner to select a lifetime income to settle the contract . There are variations of that privilege but that is the basic benefit . The accumulation of money for the fixed annuity is guaranteed by the insurance company issuing the policy . The accumulation of money for the variable annuity allows the owner to select from a group of accounts , some of which are tied to publicly traded securities . The insurance company does not guarantee those securities that are tied to publicly traded securities .
In Canada , an EFT -LRB- Exchange Traded Fund -RRB- and a Mutual Fund are similar , but there are differences . This is an overview only . Mutual funds are actively traded by investment managers . They set a strategy and buy and sell stocks and more to achieve a return . An EFT reflects the performance of an index the S&P 500 or the S&P / TSX Composite for example . Note : There are some mutual funds and segregated funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that hold EFTs as investments . If you have further questions , or if you feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . Mutual funds are often used as part of a retirement plan . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
The major advantage of term insurance is you 're getting more `` bang for your buck '' so-to-speak - meaning the rate per $ 1,000 of coverage that you 're paying is much less than permanent coverage , however , the trade-off is that you only get to pay that rate for a short amount of time -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- whereas your rates can be locked in for life with a permanent insurance policy . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the policy changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure can be seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- . There is no cash value build-up in term insurance . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will generally be substantially higher . For both GUL and WL , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I highly recommend consulting with an experienced life insurance broker to review your specific situation and help determine what life insurance will be most suitable to meet your needs and budget , review quotes , and help you through the application and underwriting processes . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
In my opinion , the best way to itemize all of your belongings for a Renters Insurance policy is to either take pictures of all items of significant value , along with a note describing when you bought the item , where , and at what price , or video tape your belongings and narrate when you bought them , where , and at what price . Then put the pictures or video on a USB Flash Drive and have someone hold it for you , do n't store it on the property that is insured . A safe deposit box , your friend or family member , or even your insurance agent themselves -LRB- I provide this service for my customers at no charge -RRB- are all good examples of who can hold this for you . From that point on , you only need to document any new items of significant value that you purchase , and remove any items you trade away or sell . -LRB- Do n't worry about recording every six pack of tube socks you buy , just the items that carry some value to them -RRB- . Of course , you can also write all this down on paper , but having visual evidence goes a long way in helping to determine what items were present when the policy was put in force , and what new items have been added . And , it 's always best to review your coverage every year with your insurance agent to make sure you are carrying the right amount of personal property coverage .
Which life insurance company is the best to work for ? That depends , because it really depends what is important to you . Some are good places to start , but not to finish and others can make for great places to have a career . There are trade offs . What I recommend is that you `` interview '' people from different companies in your area and ask them about their company and about their competition . That will provide you with insight and help you make an informed decision .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Get Insurance On A Car You Do n't Own ?
The short answer is yes . Insurance typically follows the person not the vehicle . There are many situations in which you may have access to a vehicle that you do not own . You still need to protect yourself financially by have insurance coverage when you drive the vehicle . Contact your local agent to find out about coverages and costs for the policies available within your geographic area .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
If you 're auto insurance is just too expensive for you to afford , there are some things you can do to help ease that burden . You may not like some of my advice , but it 's the right advice . A very large part of your insurance premium is the physical damage to the car itself . Raising deductibles will lower your premiums somewhat . Ask yourself if you really need to cover the physical damage at all . If it 's an older car and you own it outright , this could be an option . Before you do this , however , understand that , if your car is damaged , the insurance company will not pay to fix it . One thing not to do is to lower your bodily injury liability limits . You wo n't save very much and you 'll be putting everything you own at risk , including your income . Here 's the advice you may not like : Perhaps you have too nice a car for your budget . If that 's the case , get a less expensive car . Then , when your finances -LRB- or your driving record -RRB- allow , you can always get a nicer car . Talk to an agent you can trust . They can give you advice on these questions as well as others . It also helps if you check rates on a car before you buy it . Everyone loves getting a new car . You just do n't want an unpleasant surprise when your insurance bill comes .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
Yes you can . There are several carriers that can insure you even if you do not own a car . They call it named operator or non owned insurance . What it is , is insurance that covers liability only and roadside assistance is available also so that way if you get into an accident it covered that damage you do to other but it will not repair the car you are driving because you do not own the car . The only way you can get this coverage is if you do not have your name on a title of any car . Call you local agent they can help you with this coverage .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
You can cancel at anytime . it is not the best idea to go with out insurance . If you are canceling because the car is not running or you no longer own the car and are looking for a replacement that is different . If your car is no longer working you can place just comprehensive coverage on it and no liability while it is disabled that way it has some protection on your car . But on the flip side . If you no longer own a car you can keep the insurance till you get a replacement car and be covered if you are borrowing someone 's car and they did n't pay their insurance . Also there is the option of non owned policy . Also when you start your insurance up again if you have gone more then 30 days with no coverage your rates increase for lack of proof of prior . Talk to your agent and see what works best for you . If you are canceling because of your budget talk to your agent and see what they can do to keep you covered and at a better rate .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
I have never heard of weekly payments but have heard of 1 month policies . Most states require that you maintain insurance at all times . If you do not own a car and are looking to insure a car for just a week because you are bowering a car you ca n't insure a car you do not own . Then a non owned policy would be best
There are several way that you can do this . There are Many carries that will insure you even if you do not have a license . Always check your state laws . There are carriers that understand that you may need a Sr22 to get your license and to do this you must have insurance so you purchase the insurance with out a license then after you get your license in place because you got the SR22 contact your agent it should lower your rates . You DO NOT have to own a car to get insurance . You can get in some states what is called a Non owned policy and also some states have what is called a broadform and this covers any car you drive I Highly suggest that you contact a reputable independent insurance agent . They should be able to guide you through the proper laws and rules for your state .
That 's a great question ! Non-owned insurance is a type of policy that allows coverage for you , when you do n't actually own the vehicle . A good example ? You own a pizza joint , and the deliveries are made by the employees , in their cars . One of them has an accident . Your company has a non-owners policy , that covers the claim . It allows for payment for the repairs , even though you , the company owner , do n't own the car . Thanks for asking !
I really do n't know the answer to this question , as I believe that every person who owns and drives a car needs auto insurance . Just think for a moment , if you did n't own auto insurance and you driving a car down a city street , when the car in front of you stops suddenly , you jerk your steering wheel to the side and manage to miss the car in front of you . You open your eyes and look at yourself and see that the airbags protected you and you were not injured ... but you find that you ran head long into the corner liquor store and end up in the middle of the scotch section , having destroyed most of the owners inventory . How would you pay for that ? Savings retirement , income will all be gone , as well as maybe your house and any other property you might own , not to mention your car is toast . This is the reason you need auto insurance , as it protects your finances now and in the future
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
end question
start question
annuities
Why Does Suze Orman Not Like Annuities ?
Suze Orman seems to have softened her position on annuities . In the past she has be extremely critical of annuities . But recent postings on the Internet suggest she has modified her position if not her overall tone . Theres a piece on the Internet called Truth About Annuities , apparently authored by Suze , where she gives some latitude in their use in certain scenarios .
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
I do n't know or watch Suze Orman so I ca n't really state why she likes term life insurance over cash value life insurance . I do know that Suze Orman , Dave Ramsey and other talk radio types make blanket statements that do not suit every ones situation . The thing to remember their advice is free and you get what you pay for . Use a trusted independent advisor when purchasing life insurance to be sure you get the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
Term life insurance is a specific product for a specific need . Unlike various forms of permanent life insurance , term is designed to expire before you do . Term life insurance may be perfect for needs with a defined time limit . You can use it to cover debts such as a mortgage that is to be paid off in a specified number of years such as 15 or 30 years . Term life insurance could be used to satisfy a divorce decree where child support or even alimony -LRB- with a time limit -RRB- is required . Some business obligations are also situations where a term life insurance policy might be a good idea . But if you have a permanent need , such as for estate planning purposes -LRB- including estate liquidity -RRB- , term life insurance may not be your best choice . Suze Orman is not an agent , does not know you or your circumstances . She has no idea how much life insurance you should have any more than Jay Leno would . Suze Orman is not accountable by any means for poor advice she may offer regarding your insurance needs .
Suze Orman seems to have softened her position on annuities . In the past she has be extremely critical of annuities . But recent postings on the Internet suggest she has modified her position if not her overall tone . Theres a piece on the Internet called Truth About Annuities , apparently authored by Suze , where she gives some latitude in their use in certain scenarios .
No , Suze Orman does not like variable annuities . She does like single premium deferred annuities , and sometimes likes medical annuities for older persons . However , she does not like variable annuities . She feels they are too complicated and that the fees are too high , among other things .
To say that Suze Orman is not a fan of participating whole life insurance for death benefit coverage is an understatement . She has several online videos castigating the product as a consumer rip off . For most people , Suze believes in term life insurance and investing the difference in price between the two products .
Whether it 's Suze Orman or any of the other `` gurus '' that discuss life insurance for the majority of people , you must have a point of view that defines you with an audience . Orman is life a stopped watch , she is exactly right , but not all the time . The problem with other types of coverage is that many people spent money on whole life at the behest of an agent when that is not the appropriate type of coverage . Beware anyone that tells you what to purchase without knowing anything about your particular situation .
Suze Orman has a piece posted online called Truth About Annuities . About half way down the post she addresses variable annuities . Her explanation has a few mischaracterizations , but all in all she lays it out in an understandable manner . She seems to question the economics of tax deferral , but her treatment of variable annuities isnt as negative as some of her 2009 and 2010 YouTube videos . WEBSITELINK
This is another one of those should n't you ask Suze about ? Suze Orman believes in term insurance for the most part . Her background is as a stockbroker , not as an insurance agent . Her views are shaped by the industry she started in . After the MEC laws came about in the late 80 's , you could n't find many stockbrokers who recommended anything other than term insurance . Probably the biggest reason behind this recommendation was term insurance freed more money for investments which they got paid on , so it made perfect sense to encourage the purchase of term insurance as it freed short term money for investment . The problem is when your investments do n't earn 12 % every year and year after year , things may not work out the way you want . You may find you need life insurance longer than you thought . The real problem with following any financial guru , even if their advice is sound , is what happens when things go off path 10 % or 20 % ? Does the plan collapse ? Was all the investment return earned just you could pay a much higher premium in your old age because you bought term as a young person ? It 's an odd thing to think about in planning but simply ask what happens if you 're wrong ? How much damage hits you if you guessed wrong about the future ? This means taking a broader approach to planning , spreading risk and return to have things work out in different markets . A racing scull is faster than a rowboat , but when a wave hits and flips the racing scull over , but rocks the rowboat , which was a better choice for the body of water ?
Suze Orman usually does not recommend Whole Life Insurance because she feels that Life Insurance is not needed in Retirement . In reality , most retirees have a need for at least a basic amount Life Insurance , if not more . And Term Insurance will eventually become unaffordable because of age . So most people at least have a small need for Whole Life Insurance , or some other type of Permanent Life Insurance .
Suze Orman likes Term Life Insurance because it is a low cost way of protecting your family if you should die while they are dependent on your income . The product is easy to understand , is straightforward , and if you should die before the term is up , the death benefit is paid tax free to your beneficiaries .
`` No well-planned retirement should be without long term care -LRB- LTC -RRB- insurance . It is the very cornerstone of retirement security . '' - Suze Orman . Suze addresses LTC describes how to safeguard your financial future . This is one of the few areas Suze and the insurance industry agree on something .
Suze Orman is in favor or Term Life Insurance because it is a low cost way to provide a hefty amount of financial protection for a family . She advocates investing and saving on the side , so that your family need not be dependent on life insurance in your later years .
Suze Orman says that Term Life Insurance is the only type of life insurance to buy . She recommends buying a length of term that suits the need for which it was purchased . E.g. . If protecting a child who is 13 , purchase a 10 year term policy . She says to buy 20 times the amount of annual income that your dependents would need to survive without you . That way they can invest the principal and live off the interest .
Suze Orman recommends term life insurance over participating whole life insurance , which she has a disdain for . She as well as Dave Ramsey are huge proponents of term life insurance . And for financial liabilities that are time certain events , thats just fine . Generally you can only recommend what you understand . That in and of itself can eliminate your opining on an area you just dont understand .
Suze Orman is against Whole Life insurance because she feels that people can do better by buying Term Life insurance and investing the rest . Technically , it is true that certain stocks or other investments will give a far better return on one 's dollar . But when one considers the risk and taxation on those types of investments , plus the fact that a large amount of medical expenses or just lack of self control might deplete one 's savings in the later years , buying Whole Life insurance can make sense for some people . No cookie cutter approach fits everyone .
Clark Howard goes along with the general theory that you need 10 to 20 times your income with term life insurance . Most radio personalities that give financial advice have to be very generic and not deal with specifics or they would bore everyone to death . Suze Orman , Clark Howard and Dave Ramsey are all popular personalities that agree on this point .
Over the years Suze has addressed annuities , not always in a favorable light . She has several online videos and content blogs and articles on annuities . Suze has a small treatise online entitled , Truth About Annuities , which outlines the product inventory in a pithy format that gives you her read on the subject .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Vital Stim Covered By Medicare ?
Vitalstim is not covered by Medicare for the treatment of dyspahgia . They have explained that the treatment is experimental and has not proven to be effective in treating swallowing difficulty . Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation -LRB- NMES -RRB- can be covered for non-neurological reasons for disuse atrophy and for walking in patients with spinal cord injury .
To confirm whether Part B will cover Prolia and what conditions must be met to have it covered , you will need to contact Medicare directly . I believe Prolia has been covered under Medicare Part B for a number of years up to one injection every 6 months - typically required to be recommended by your physician . It can often be listed under Part D plans ' formularies as well , but as it is often administered by a doctor , it would typically be cited under Part B. Please note , Part D plans can change their coverage year to year - they are not guaranteed renewable and every plan is different . The drugs that a plan covers can change , the premiums , deductibles , copays , coinsurance , and other factors of a plan can change each year . Plans can even be terminated or replaced and therefore automatically disenroll the consumer , forcing them to select another plan . For the insured person , it 's vital they review their prescription drug coverage each year to determine what plan will best serve their needs for the coming year . When Prolia is covered under Part B , a Medicare Supplement plan might cover the other 20 % of the cost after Medicare pays it 's 80 % share . Whether the Medigap insurer will cover the other 20 % would need to be confirmed with a carrier - when it comes to drugs covered by Part B , there 's usually a couple extra conditions that have to be met for it to be covered as most drugs are covered by Part D. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with Medicare Supplement help . Thanks very much .
Medicare covers a preventive screening visit when you 're new to Medicare and yearly `` wellness '' visits . A full annual physical exam would not be covered at 100 % . The new to Medicare preventive visit can be completed one time within the first year your Part B is active and includes a review of your medical history , discussion about preventive services -LRB- e.g. certain screenings , shots , etc. -RRB- , ht/wt measurement , blood pressure check , vision test , and a BMI index check . The yearly `` wellness '' visits can be completed once every 12 months if you 've had Part B for longer than a year . The purpose of the wellness visits is to develop and monitor a plan to help prevent disease and disability based on your health . Your would complete a health risk assessment with your doctor as well . Like the welcome to Medicare preventive visit , these visits include a review of your medical history , ht/wt check , and a blood pressure check . These test are only covered at 100 % if you 're doctor accepts Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . Otherwise , you would be responsible for a portion of the costs -LRB- typically 20 % coinsurance -RRB- and the Part B deductible may apply -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . You can also be subject to paying for other services that are conducted during the visit if they are not covered as part of the preventive visit benefits -LRB- e.g. blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- . Typically , original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only covers about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . You may want to look at supplementing your coverage with a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare supplement plan -RRB- to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of more assistance . Thanks very much .
With Key Person disability insurance , if a vital employee becomes disabled , the business will receive disability income to cover the financial loss of the missing employee . And if a business has more than one key employee whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then Key Person disability insurance can be purchased for more than one person in the business . Any business that would find it hard to replace a vital employee needs Key Person disability insurance . Much like the saying , if a business puts all its eggs in the basket of one person , it wont be able to sustain itself should that person become disabled .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . If you have any questions about Medicare supplement plans or would like to review programs available in your zip code , please send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or visit my profile page for my direct contact information .
Medigap plans cover the gaps in cost that Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- does not cover . Medicare Part A & Part B only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap Plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- all or a portion of that other 20 % , depending on which Medigap plan you have -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it limits the expenses a senior can be exposed to by creating a very predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medigap plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best time to buy Medigap -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- right when you activate your Medicare Part B insurance . When you start Part B , it opens a 6-month initial open enrollment period to apply for any Medigap plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . If you do n't secure a Medigap plan during this period and later you decide you want one , you will be subject to medical underwriting unless you qualify for a guaranteed issue right . So why get one?Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well .
Medigap is another name for Medicare Supplement plans . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medigap plan is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a very controlled and predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons , and any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Anyone 65 or older on Medicare who wants to create a very predictable healthcare expense structure where they do n't leave themselves exposed to many costs and high hospital/doctor bills should buy a Medigap plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Please forgive any grammar or punctuation mistakes as I am using talk to text on my phone . So much has changed since this question was asked . More than ever before comma it is vital , understand I 'm emphasizing vital Kama that you understand how your network actually works . In my home state for the first time in 2016 we had Network types other than a PPO available . One called an EPO and the other a POS . Other than true emergencies there is no coverage outside of the network service area with many , if not all , of these types of Networks . The definition of emergency is very Grey . What you may think is an emergency may not be viewed as such by the insurance carrier . Depending on what 's available in your state I would suggest buying a PPO or HMO if at all possible . Although the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum typically doubles when you go out of network with these type of plans , it 's much better than being stuck with 100 % of the bill . If your agents is not specifically , and accurately comma scrubbing the doctors and hospitals that you wish to access during the buying process - fire that agent !! Access . Access . Access . Do n't you want to buy something that is worth the money you pay every month ? Please understand your network . Please pay a little extra for a network that includes as many doctors and hospitals as possible . A network that possibly has Nationwide access to the Top Doctors and hospitals . If you have any questions , please reach out . - gravy
A Medicare wellness exam is a yearly visit -LRB- conducted with your physician -RRB- available to individuals who have had Medicare Part B for more than 12 months . Your doctor must accept Medicare and assignment for it to be 100 % covered by Medicare . The purpose of a `` wellness '' exam is to create and maintain a prevention plan to help prevent diseases and disabilities that is customized to you -LRB- based on your current health and risk factors -RRB- . During the exam : 1 -RRB- Your doctor will generally have you fill out health risk assessment -LRB- usually a questionnaire -RRB- during the visit 2 -RRB- Review and update your medical history 3 -RRB- Check your vitals -LRB- height , weight , blood pressure , etc. -RRB- 4 -RRB- Check you for any cognitive impairments 5 -RRB- Provide suggestions to help you improve potential problem health areas 6 -RRB- Create a screening schedule for preventative services Please note , however , any additional services that a doctor conducts or orders , may not be covered by the wellness exam benefits and you might have to pay a coinsurance or deductible depending upon what programs you have -LRB- e.g. Parts A , B , and a Medicare supplement , only Part A & B , etc. -RRB-
A tummy tuck will be covered under your health insurance plan as long as it is considered -LRB- and coded -RRB- as medically necessary by your attending physician . Often times this is considered an elective procedure and wo n't be covered . It 's vital to contact your carrier prior to the procedure to find out how -LRB- if at all -RRB- they will cover the surgery . The best place to start is to call the benefits verification or pre-certification phone number on the back of your insurance cards .
As long as the sleep disorder is under a physicians care , considered medically necessary treatment and not excluded due a limitation or pre-existing condition clause , then most times YES ! It 's vital to not only read your benefits , but also to contact your carrier prior to treatment to make sure your benefits cover the expense .
As Peggy said this is a policy of insurance that covers all the employees of an organization with life insurance , the death benefit being payable to the company . It could be viewed as an adaptation of key man insurance in that it treats every employee as vital to the organization . It is true that the loss of any employee costs the business something .
No , Social Security does not offer life insurance . There are really no federal or state provisions for life insurance , except a minimal amount allotted for funeral or burial costs if one is on Medicaid , or a military veteran . This allotment is not enough to cover even a minimal service and cremation . So it is vital to take care of this important need on one 's own with a private policy , through savings , or a pre-need funeral plan .
Health insurance is vital for everyone . Even a person that is young and healthy can be involved in an accident . The average ER visit is around $ 1,300 while the average cost per hospital stay is over $ 10,000 . While health insurance can be very expensive , the new tax credits can reduce the cost significantly . Additionally , those under 30 can qualify for catastrophic coverage . These policies have lower monthly premiums and cover only preventive care and any costs over $ 6,350 per individual . This provides the lowest monthly premium while limiting out-of-pocket costs .
Your pre-existing condition is not necessarily covered by you insurance plan . Although applicants can no longer be denied due to their medical history , many plans still have exclusions and limitations written into the policy . It 's vital to read through the summary of benefits and Coverage prior to enrolling in a policy to make sure it protects you and your conditions . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , feel free to call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is A SERP Retirement Plan ?
A SERP is a Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan generally for key executives in a company . Employers who wish to retain the services of important employees use deferred compensation plans as golden handcuffs to secure their employment into the future . SERPs generally have a vesting schedule over a time certain period described in the arrangement .
A SERP is a Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan generally for key executives in a company . Employers who wish to retain the services of important employees use deferred compensation plans as golden handcuffs to secure their employment into the future . SERPs generally have a vesting schedule over a time certain period described in the arrangement .
A supplementae executive retirement plan or SERP is a form of non-qualified deferred compensation . Since the planned is non-qualified , the employer has the ability to select who participate in the plan -LRB- i.e. they can choose to offer such a plan only to a select number of employees and do not have to make the offer to everyone -RRB- . Traditionally the plans are set up as additional retirement benefits to an employee who is highly coveted by the employer . The plans are used as an incentive to keep certain key employees and disuade them from leaving the employer . The retirement benefits offered under the plan are only payable to the employee if he or she stays at the employer for a certain period of time , which can be a rather longer period of time .
The simple answer to your question is that insurance premiums ARE NOT a deductible expense for anyone . However , depending upon the use of the insurance , for instance , as part of an Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan -LRB- SERP plans -RRB- , there are tax benefits -LRB- deduction -RRB- to the employer realized when the policy 's cash value is paid out to the employee . Additionally , administrative costs may be tax-deductible as a business expense . Separately , under anexecutive bonus plans where the bonus is paid directly in the form of premium payments to the insurer for policies owned and FBO of the executive , the employer has no ERISA reporting , potentially tax deductible costs and can avert tax rules applicable to Qualified Pans and employer owner line insurance . Please feel free to contact me through my profile if you have additional questions .
Unfortunately , no . Insurance premiums are not tax deductible nor can they be taken pre-tax . HOWEVER , be sure to enroll/elect in any employer paid group life insurance or individual life insurance policies . If the policy is not part of a SERP plan or other executive compensation plan , it is a way to pick up small coverage without any out of pocket contributions .
The first place that you can check is Policy Locator Service through the Medical Information Bureau . MIB Group , Inc is a cooperative data exchange formed by the North American life insurance industry in 1909 . There is a cost associated with the search but it will return results via mail with a list of queries by insurance companies for underwriting on the search subject , from whenever they were `` shopped '' for insurance . Keep in mind , that this is not 100 % inclusive for all insurers . The search form is located here WEBSITELINK Secondly , through some sleuthing using either the above list or my following list of suggestions , you should contact the insurers on your target list , in order to verify the active policies . Where to search : - Credit card and bank statements : Go back through the insured 's financial records and look for periodic payments to insurers , whether it be on a monthly , quarterly , semi-annual or annual basis . This should indicate who the insurer is/was based upon where the money is paid to . - Banks , Credit Unions , Credit card companies : Often times , many banks , lenders and credit companies offer group policies for their account holders for as little as $ 1,000.00 of coverage and higher amounts based upon certain requirements . Check with these groups to see if they had offered any of these products at any point in time . - Pay stubs/Employers and Benefits companies : Many employers offer a basic life or AD&D policy to full time employees for free as well as inexpensive group policies . Deductions for the premium payments on the group policies may be found on the insured 's pay stub . However , many times , this coverage is only active when the insured is employed . - Split Dollar/Executive Compensation plans : Some employers taking advantage of tax regulations , used life insurance to pay benefits to key employees which may have also been part of Supplemental Exec Retirement Plans -LRB- SERP -RRB- . Verify with the insured 's former employers if any plan existed . - Unions , Pensions and Fraternal organizations : Many Unions and Pension funds may have a small paid-up policy on the insured as part of their benefits package . The same goes for Fraternal organizations including Knights of Columbus , Elks , Masons , etc. . Many times the search is no easy task however , after a bit of detective work and dedication , you may uncover a handful of forgotten or unknown small policies , where the cumulative benefit adds up and more than justifies the search !
It is smart to consider life insurance . Life insurance provides financial security and piece of mind . It is unique in providing income tax free cash when it is needed the most . Life insurance offers protection , income replacement , and the chance to leave a legacy . With life insurance , you are protecting the people you care about the most . Life insurance can also protect the business you own . Some of the many things life insurance can do include : Pay burial and other final expenses . Replace income lost due to the death of a wage earner . Pay off debt obligations such as a car loan , credit cards , etc. . Pay off or reduce a home mortgage . Establish a fund to pay for domestic services lost at the death of the primary caregiver . Create an education fund . Enhance an estate to provide for children of a prior marriage . Satisfy divorce related obligations such as alimony or child support . Create a fund to provide care for a loved one with special needs . Pay legal and administrative costs incurred at the insureds death . Provide a source of liquidity to pay state and/or federal estate taxes . Mitigate the impact taxes can have on assets owned in trust . Replace loss due to income tax on Income in Respect of Decedent -LRB- IRD -RRB- assets such as annuities , IRAs , and qualified plan assets . Diminish the impact of marital deduction limitations of a surviving resident noncitizen spouse . Increase the value of transfers of generation-skipping , annual exclusion , and exemption gift amounts . Leave a charitable legacy . Replace wealth left to a charity . Equalize inheritances between business heirs and non-business heirs . Collateralize a business loan . Fund a buy-sell agreement . Stabilize a business at the death of a key employee or owner . Offset the loss of a key employee -LRB- at death -RRB- to the business . Establish a fund to retain key employees -LRB- such as stay-bonus , SERP , deferred compensation -RRB- . Facilitate an Employee Stock Ownership Plan -LRB- ESOP -RRB- repurchase obligation .
Life insurance offers protection , income replacement , and the chance to leave a legacy . With life insurance , you are protecting the people you care about the most . Life insurance can also protect the business you own . Life insurance can : Pay burial and other final expenses . Replace income lost due to the death of a wage earner . Pay off debt obligations such as a car loan , credit cards , etc. . Pay off or reduce a home mortgage . Establish a fund to pay for domestic services lost at the death of the primary caregiver . Create an education fund . Enhance an estate to provide for children of a prior marriage . Satisfy divorce related obligations such as alimony or child support . Create a fund to provide care for a loved one with special needs . Pay legal and administrative costs incurred at the insureds death . Provide a source of liquidity to pay state and/or federal estate taxes . Mitigate the impact taxes can have on assets owned in trust . Replace loss due to income tax on Income in Respect of Decedent -LRB- IRD -RRB- assets such as annuities , IRAs , and qualified plan assets . Diminish the impact of marital deduction limitations of a surviving resident noncitizen spouse . Increase the value of transfers of generation-skipping , annual exclusion , and exemption gift amounts . Leave a charitable legacy . Replace wealth left to a charity . Equalize inheritances between business heirs & non-business heirs . Collateralize a business loan . Fund a buy-sell agreement . Stabilize a business at the death of a key employee or owner . Offset the loss of a key employee -LRB- at death -RRB- to the business . Establish a fund to retain key employees -LRB- such as stay-bonus , SERP , deferred compensation -RRB- . Facilitate an Employee Stock Ownership Plan -LRB- ESOP -RRB- repurchase obligation .
You should consider what your needs are for life insurance and ask yourself if they are finite . Many people understand the need to protect their family with life insurance to replace income lost due to the death of a wage earner but mistakenly believe that , when they stop working , the need for life insurance goes away . Life insurance offers protection , income replacement , and the chance to leave a legacy . With life insurance , you are protecting the people you care about the most . Life insurance can also protect the business you own . Here is a partial list of permanent needs where cash value life insurance is an ideal solution : Pay burial and other final expenses . Pay off debt obligations such as a car loan , credit cards , etc. . Pay off or reduce a home mortgage . Create an education fund for kids or grandchildren . Enhance an estate to provide for children of a prior marriage . Satisfy divorce related obligations such as alimony or child support . Create a fund to provide care for a loved one with special needs . Pay legal and administrative costs incurred at the insureds death . Provide a source of liquidity to pay state and/or federal estate taxes . Mitigate the impact taxes can have on assets owned in trust . Replace loss due to income tax on Income in Respect of Decedent -LRB- IRD -RRB- assets such as annuities , IRAs , and qualified plan assets . Diminish the impact of marital deduction limitations of a surviving resident noncitizen spouse . Increase the value of transfers of generation-skipping , annual exclusion , and exemption gift amounts . Leave a charitable legacy . Replace wealth left to a charity . Equalize inheritances between business heirs and non-business heirs . Collateralize a business loan . Fund a buy-sell agreement . Stabilize a business at the death of a key employee or owner . Offset the loss of a key employee -LRB- at death -RRB- to the business . Establish a fund to retain key employees -LRB- such as stay-bonus , SERP , deferred compensation -RRB- . Facilitate an Employee Stock Ownership Plan -LRB- ESOP -RRB- repurchase obligation .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
When Should You Get Renters Insurance ?
You need renters insurance when you have something to loose . That something could be more than your stuff . It could be the reasonable rent you have . If there were a fire , and you had to leave for another apartment , you might have to pay more rent . LOSS OF USE is a coverage built in to the policy . If you have to leave your 2 bedroom , second floor apartment where you pay $ 500 a month because of a fire , you can move into a similar apartment and if that similar apartment cost more , LOSS OF USE will pay for the extra -LRB- above $ 500 -RRB- rent . It will not pay for you to move into a four bedroom penthouse apartment . That 's not similar . If a friend or someone else visits , goes to the bathroom and slips on the floor they could get injured ... badly . A renters policy includes two important coverages : MEDICAL PAYMENTS and BODILY INJURY LIABILITY . MEDICAL PAYMENTS would pay hospital or doctor expenses necessary to treat your friend . The limit is usually $ 1,000 but you can buy more and it 's cheap . If your friend gets a lawyer and sues you , BODILY INJURY LIABILIYT will pay for an attorney to defend you AND pay the damages if you lose . The limits generally start at $ 100,000 , but check the price for higher limits as it also is cheap . Finally , there is your stuff . Maybe it 's used and worn and you do n't think it 's worth a lot . But if you had to go out and buy EVERYTHING all over again , it would be expensive . You can buy insurance that will replace your old stuff with new stuff . You just have to make sure you have REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE . REMEMBER : Insurance does not cover everything for every imaginable kind of claim . There are limits and exclusions . They are generally the same from company to company . Find an agent you can talk to and ask questions . Good Luck Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers 877-414-2031 WEBSITELINK
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
You should get a renters insurance policy before you occupy a unit that requires that you carry renters insurance . You should get a policy before you put your personal property into a unit because the landlord is not responsible for your property , even if his unit burns to the ground , with your property inside . You should get a policy before you move into a new unit in case someone helping you move is injured and it results in a lawsuit . The landlord doesnt have any responsibility for that either .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Renters insurance is about the same rate with all carriers . The average renters policy in Montana is bout $ 100 a year with $ 30,000 worth of contents and $ 100,000 in Liability limits with $ 5,000 in medical pay and a $ 500.00 deductible . Most carriers are between $ 10 to $ 15 a month . The only advantage in choosing some carriers is that if you already have an auto policy with the same carrier then it can lower your auto insurance . Example I have a client that has a carrier in our agency for her auto but they carrier does n't let agents sell the renters policy you can only get it online . But what she did was get the renters policy online for $ 100 a year but it lowered her car insurance $ 80 every 6 months hence it was almost like getting paid to have the renters insurance . I would talk to your local agent and see if they have any package deals since renters policies are so inexpensive but well worth the investment .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is available for tenants in all States . Renters Insurance Policies cover personal property , additional living expenses , personal liability and medical payments to others . Renters Insurance can be purchased by tenants renting houses , apartment units , condos and townhomes . Renters Insurance is transferrable from one rental unit to another when the insured moves ; however , it is not transferrable across State lines since policies need to be rewritten according to State Department of Insurance regulations which are different in each State . Stillwater Insurance Group offers the most affordable options for renters ; there is also an online self service renters insurance platform available directly for clients ' use : WEBSITELINK Using the above link , you may obtain a free quote and purchase your insurance contract directly online . For further questions regarding any details , you may contact a licensed representative at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 .
You will find renters insurance to be very inexpensive . With most companies renter insurance covering approximately $ 5,000 to $ 10,000 in personal contents and $ 300,000 in personal liability to be approximately $ 150 to $ 300 dollars a year which is equivalent to about $ 12.50 to $ 25 dollars a month . Depending on the carrier this could vary . By writing a renters policy not only are you getting coverage for your personal belongings but you are also getting personal liability coverage . Some companies also include additional coverage such as host liquor liability , which you would need to rent halls for events like a wedding or a birthday . You may also be able to schedule things such as your cell phone which may or may not be cheaper then purchasing the coverage from your cell phone carrier . You will find that if you purchase your renters policy through the same carrier as your auto insurance that the discount you receive on your auto insurance will more than pay for your renters policy . Multi-policy discounts with some companies can range from 5 % -20 % or possibly more , which can save you hundreds on your auto insurance . So be sure to talk to your insurance agent about writing a renters policy and what discounts are available .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Many Companies Will Drop Health Insurance ?
It 's hard to predict how many companies will drop health insurance . However , the number could be significant , although not likely staggering . If they drop coverage for their employees , many companies will have to pay a fine , due to Obamacare . However , they may become much more competitive in the marketplace which will help their productivity .
No one knows with certainty but there is considerable speculation that most employers with fewer than 50 full time employees will not offer health insurance . There is no reason to since there are no penalties and the cost is usually prohibitive , especially for small companies . Some very large companies have indicated they will drop insurance but so far it is just saber rattling .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
It 's hard to predict how many companies will drop health insurance . However , the number could be significant , although not likely staggering . If they drop coverage for their employees , many companies will have to pay a fine , due to Obamacare . However , they may become much more competitive in the marketplace which will help their productivity .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
Dependent children are eligible to be covered under their parent 's health insurance plan up to age 26 . Regarding dropping a dependent from your health insurance coverage , itwill depend upon whether you have an individual health insurance policy or whether you are covered under a group health insurance policy that includes a Section 125 plan . If you have an individual policy then it should be a simple matter of contacting your agent or the health insurance carrier and notifying them of your intention to drop the dependent child from your coverage . It is most likely that you will need to complete and sign a termination request form so that all the legalities associated with terminating a person 's coverage are complied with . If you are covering your dependent under your group health insurance coverage through your employer and they have a Section 125 plan in place your situation will be more complicated . If you do n't know what a Section 125 plan is , if you are paying any portion of your health insurance premium and it is being taken out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis then you are almost certainly subject to a Section 125 plan . Check with your HR person , the business owner or their insurance broker to get a definitive answer to this issue . Under IRS regulations because you are enjoying the advantages of pre-tax treatment for your share of your health insurance costs this advantage comes with some strings attached regarding the employee 's ability to change their coverage outside of the group 's normal open enrollment period . Essentially you have to have what is called a `` Change of Life Status Event '' to change your coverage status outside of open enrollment time . These are specific events such as marriage , divorce , adoption , losing coverage that you had elsewhere and a few other circumstances . Just getting mad at your 23 year old son who wo n't get off the couch and plays X-Box all day -LRB- while certainly a problem -RRB- does not meet the criteria of a change of life status event and you would not be able to drop them from your coverage until your group 's next open enrollment .
You employer may drop your health insurance . However , there are many underwater stones involved with this executive decision . For example , the employer can not drop the coverage for you only , except when you , for example moved from Full Time to Part Time and in order to be eligible for benefits you must work full time . Or may be you were moved from employee status to 1099 ? If you 've learned that your employer dropped your health insurance , but other employees of the company still receive this benefit - contact a lawyer . This could be a basis for a lawsuit against your employer .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
The easy answer to drop your term life insurance is when you goal for that plan is met . For example , if you purchased the plan to cover a 30 year mortgage and paid it off early and have no further need for the protection you should drop it . If the term is met and the rates increased drastically you may want to drop it and apply for another policy if your health is still good . Another scenario may be retirement and the nest egg is fully funded with no unforeseen circumstances , it could be time to drop it or convert it to permanent life insurance or paid up life insurance if the need for a death benefit still exists .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
Dropping collision on your car depends on how much you wish to self insure . As long as you do not have a loan you can drop collision anytime . However one of the more common times to consider dropping collision is if your vehicle is worth $ 3500.00 or less . The reason for this thinking is this is the amount uninsured motorist property damage would pick up in the event you are hit by someone with no insurance . Of course your still on your own if you cause the accident or if your involved in a hit and run type situation where you do n't know who caused the accident . You may want to look at what you actually are paying for collision coverage and what the vehicle is worth in a total loss since this is all your going to get .
Yes , but not just because someone in the front office feels like picking on you that day . There would have to be some change in your eligibility status or what the company 's policy is to trigger such an event . For example , you had your working hours reduced below 30 hours per week and this puts you below both your employer 's and the Federal government 's definition of what a full-time eligible employee is -LRB- 30 or more hours per week defines a person as full-time for benefits eligibility under ObamaCare -RRB- . This could trigger your still being an employee but no longer being eligible for their group health insurance plan . If you are responsible for paying a portion of your health insurance premium -LRB- and most employees are these days -RRB- and for some reason you are unable to pay your share of the premium -LRB- usually hard to do since these payments are generally taken out on a payroll deduction basis -RRB- then you could be terminated for non-payment of premium . Of course , if your employer decides to terminate their group health insurance plan entirely and you are dropped from coverage because a group plan no longer exists at your workplace you are obviously dropped . Though usually even small employers will try to give advance notice and employers -LRB- especially larger ones -RRB- are required to give a certain amount of advance notice of a plan change or termination . But you ca n't be dropped from your employer 's coverage in an arbitrary manner while still an employee meeting all the eligibility requirements set forth under your employer 's personnel policies and state and Federal laws . For example , you could n't be terminated from the health insurance plan simply because your were running up a lot of expenses for your cancer treatment .
Great question ! There would be a couple of immediate results . The first is that you would no longer have the benefit of insurance to help pay for costs should you become sick or injured . Those costs can be devastating to your financial stability . The second is that under the Affordable Care Act , there are penalties for not having insurance , that are leveled when you file your taxes for this year . The health insurance companies limit the ability to enroll in their programs , and many workplace plans will not drop you until the open enrollment period unless you meet specified conditions.Without knowing the reason that you are considering dropping your coverage , I would ask that you would have a plan in place before you actually do drop your coverage . If I can provide more information , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
The single best thing you can do is shop around with other auto insurance companies . Each company is unique in that they have their own appetite for what they like and do n't like . You may fit right into some company 's `` sweet spot '' . But you will never know which companies can beat your current rates . As far as lowering premium on an active policy , you have to be careful . Normally when drivers lower their coverages or cut them out altogether , they tend to make cuts in the wrong areas . It 's important to understand the difference between a controlled risk and an uncontrolled risk . A controlled risk is one where by lowering or dropping coverage , you know the exact dollar amount of the extra risk you are taking on . This includes raising your deductibles on comprehensive and collision coverage -LRB- or dropping it altogether -RRB- , dropping additional coverage such as rental and roadside assistance/towing . Stay away from lowering uncontrolled risks ! Namely liability coverage and uninsured motorist bodily injury coverage . This is where people get burned ! Keep both of these as high as you can afford them .
In a word , yes . There are circumstances , however , that must be justified by the underwriting standards filed by the insurance company with your State 's Insurance Department . Obviously if you do n't pay your premium , you will be dropped at the end of the grace period , if your policy has one . If you receive too many tickets or are responsible for too many chargeable accidents , you may be non-renewed . If you have an accident and receive a serious infraction ticket that results in your license being suspended , it may also be possible that your company may drop you mid term .
Can you drop your husband from your health insurance ? Well the answer may vary by state . You may be able to drop your husband , but he will have to agree in writing for it to be done . The reason for this is when a couple divorces a spouse sometimes drops the others coverage without their knowledge . Sort of like emptying the bank account .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Joint Credit Life Insurance Work ?
Credit life insurance is not traditional life insurance that pays the beneficiary , who in turn pays lenders . Credit life insurance charges the borrower for credit insurance that will pay the loan off in the event of death of the borrower . The money goes directly to the lender . Joint credit life insurance covers two insured persons , the borrower and co-signer . It will pay the loan off if either one or both insured persons passes .
Medicare does cover joint replacement if the need to replace the joint is considered medically necessary . Joint replacement includes shoulder , hip , knee and other body joints . Make sure you use a medical provider that accepts assignment . Some replacement joint devices are considered a `` premium '' device . You may be responsible for paying the difference in a basic device and an upgrade . Your provider can advise .
Medicare Part A is typically $ 0 as long as you met your 40 quarters -LRB- or 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes -LRB- Medicare taxes -RRB- . If you have not met that requirement , the monthly premium is up to $ 426 per month . For 2014 , the premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 . This can change each year and is based on your modified adjusted gross income on your tax return from 2 years prior . You may also face a high-income premium penalty on your Part B coverage . The $ 104.90 premium is for those with incomes of $ 85,000 or less , if filing an individual tax return , and $ 170,000 , if filing a joint tax return . If your income was between $ 85,000 and $ 107,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 170,000 and $ 214,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 146.90 . If your income was between $ 107,000 and $ 160,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 214,000 and $ 320,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 209.80 . If your income was between $ 160,000 and $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 320,000 and $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 272.70 . If your income was above $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 335.70 . You can encounter other expenses as well such as the Part A and Part B deductibles and late enrollment penalties for not enrolling in Part B when you were first eligible for Medicare . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of healthcare expenses . You 're generally responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan can greatly help establish a predictable expense structure - essential for individuals on a fixed income in retirement . It will limit the amount of cost you 're susceptible to in the event of an illness or injury .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
There are Joint and Survivor Annuities that cover two or more lives and continue in force as long as any of them survive . There are Joint Life Insurance policies that cover two or more lives , which end when the first of the insured persons die . There are Survivor Life Insurance policies that typically cover two lives , which end when the last of the insured persons dies -LRB- thus the name , Second to Die -RRB- . Finally , there are Joint and Last Survivor policies that are a variation of Joint Life Insurance , which pay when the second persons die .
Absolutely . But there are different rules if the joint owners are a married couple or not -LRB- for example , a Father names his daughter as joint owner -RRB- . If the joint owners of the annuity are married , then it is recommended that each spouse names the other as primary beneficiary . For the spousal exception to the required distribution rules to apply , the surviving spouse must be the designated beneficiary of the contract . These rules are designed to prevent the use of joint ownership to obtain tax deferral on annuity earnings over more than one lifetime , except in the case of married couples . In the event of the owners death , the spouse can succeed to ownership by application of the spousal exception to the required distribution rule . If someone other than the surviving spouse is the designated beneficiary , or even if the spouse is the beneficiary along with another person , then even if the surviving spouse is a joint owner , the spousal exception is lost . There are some caveats to setting up a jointly owned annuity . It 's best to talk to a professional insurance agent to avoid the pitfalls .
Joint Whole Life is a policy that covers two people on the same policy . The policy will pay when the first party dies . The surviving party then has the right to purchase another policy regardless of insurability . Another form of Joint life is a last to die . The policy is scheduled to pay at the last insured death . While there are some advantages to joint life , my experience has been that they can be a nightmare at times , particularly in the case of a joint life on a husband and wife going through a divorce . Because of the volatile nature of divorce situations having two people get together to divide the policy into two individual contracts can be a touchy situation . My preference in most situations is two separate policies .
What is a joint Roth IRA ? Well ? as far as I know there is no such thing as a Joint Roth Individual Retirement Account . If you did n't catch it in the name , an IRA is an individual account , not really a joint account . What you might be really asking is are surrender or change decisions a `` joint '' decision if you 're married ? Depending on the state the answer could be yes . So if someone who is married cashes out their plan in some states it requires the spouses signature as well .
Joint life insurance is usually referring to joint second-to-die which is also known as survivorship life insurance . These policies insure two lives and became popular with the advent of the unlimited martial deduction in the early 1980s . It has become a common way to provide for estate liquidity . Priced at a lower premium than two single life policies , survivorship policies pay nothing at the first death . The policy death benefit pays at the death of the second insured to die . While readily available at one time , joint first-to-die life insurance policies are no longer available from A rated carriers that distribute through life insurance brokers .
Joint Universal Life Insurance is a universal life insurance policy that covers two people . It can be a `` first to die '' or `` second to die '' policy . If a first to die UL , the policy will pay the death benefit to the survivor when the first of the two persons passes away . If a second to die UL , the policy will pay the death benefit to a third party when both of the insured persons have passed . This latter type of joint coverage is also called survivorship life insurance . Some reasons people may purchase joint universal insurance are : 1 -RRB- They want to consolidate the number of policies they have . 2 -RRB- One of the insured persons may be uninsurable under a regular policy , but can be covered by a second to die policy . 3 -RRB- Only the survivor needs the coverage ... after the second person passes away there is no need for life insurance ... thus a first to die policy works well for them .
Joint life insurance covers two people and pays out the death benefit upon the death of the second person . Thus , it is often called `` second-to-die '' life insurance . Joint Life insurance typically costs less than buying life insurance policies for the two individuals separately . It also is able to cover a person that is hard to impossible to insure through a separate policy , as long as the other one of the persons covered by the joint policy is in fairly good health .
Generally , when people ask about joint life insurance they are asking about joint second-to-die aka survivorship life insurance . These policies insure two lives and became popular with the advent of the unlimited martial deduction for estate planning in the early 1980s . For a lower premium survivorship policies pay nothing at the first death . The policy death benefit pays at the death of the second insured to die . While readily available at one time , joint first-to-die life insurance policies are no longer available from A rated carriers that distribute through life insurance brokers .
There are different kinds of joint life insurance policies , but most share similar streets . Joint life policies issue coverage to two or more individuals under one life insurance policy . The typical arrangement is a husband and wife , but there are also business applications as well . Most joint life insurance plans pay a death benefit on the first to die but second to die policies are quite common in estate planning situations .
A joint survivorship life insurance policy is a pretty ingenious creation . The idea is to have two insureds on one policy . Whats so good about that ? From an insurance companys point of view , they dont have to pay the benefit until the second insured dies . This can give them more years to collect and invest premium , than they would have with only one insured . Can you imagine if one of the insureds was much younger than the other say with an older gentleman and his younger new bride ? Decades could pass before a claim will be made . From the insureds point of view , blended underwriting can work very much to their joint advantage . Take the example above . The husband may unfortunately be older , and in ill health . He may be uninsurable , or eligible at a very high rate . However , his younger wife may qualify for the lowest rates available . The premium they would have to pay jointly could be very reasonable . Not only that : the husband may get coverage whereas on his own , that would be impossible . You can see that joint survivorship life insurance can be a very affordable way to cover needs such as estate preservation , and making charitable bequests .
It is difficult to give a definitive answer on this . A joint replacement surgery usually comes after years of treatment and physical therapy . In general Medicare must consider the joint replacement surgery to be medically necessary before they will pay on the claim . Without knowing the specific details of your history I really can not say for sure how medicare would look at the this treatment in your situation . I would recommend that you call Medicare directly to ask them how would treat this surgery . The phone number is 1-800-MEDICARE , I wish I had a better answer for you .
A joint life insurance policy covers two or more lives . When one of the insured persons dies , the policy pays the death benefit and ends . It no longer covers the other insured person . A joint and last survivor policy does not pay when the first person dies , but pays when the last person dies .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Life insurance must be distributed to a beneficiary and not the estate to remain exempt from the deceaseds creditors . The beneficiaries creditors would be able to go after the life insurance proceeds . Most retirement accounts and cash value within a life insurance policy are exempt from creditors and can be retained , even through bankruptcy . One way creditors sometimes get to the funds is if life insurance proceeds are deposited into what was a joint checking account that the creditor had access to . While a person may be able to have the funds returned through legal proceedings , it is often best to close the joint account and open a new account .
Some insurance carriers may use a credit score for rating purposes . Most of the insurance carriers in my state -LRB- New York -RRB- use a ` credit profile ' which means they access one of the big three credit bureaus and select specific items . What they select , how they interpret the data , and how it affects your premiums is not available for your scrutiny . In NY , credit profile is mostly used for new business quoting purposes for home and auto insurance . Carriers in NY load in a whole bunch of rating info when determining your premium - gender , age , marital status , own or rent your home , driving extract , # of years licensed , prior claims on home and/or auto policies , is your prior carrier preferred , standard , or substandard , distance driven to work , pleasuire or business use , and a lot more . Keep your ` credit profile ' and score as clean as possible . Most banks and credit unions have credit specialists who can advise you for free on how to do this . For example , pay all bills ahead of time if possible and always pay more than the minimum amounts . Do n't have credit lines totaling more than a certain % of your gross annual income , etc. . Credit profile is a major influence when getting insurance quotes . I know of no ` proof ' credit profile is a determinate of loss potential , but using credit profile for insurance rating is the way of the world .
Joint life policies are Life Insurance policies that are written on two lives rather than single , This means that if one of the joint policyholders dies during the term then the benefits would be paid to the use surviving holder . This is only a one time payment and the policy is to insure two lives . On the contrary , in a single policy the policy is written on one person or two people , therefore , becomes separate policies and the benefits are payed for each policy owner .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Smoke Weed And Get Life Insurance ?
You sure can toke and get life insurance ... . kinda ... Do n't take all our answers as a 100 % YES that you can ... . Since the time of the last posts , a LOT has happened politically around the subject of weed . Some life insurance carriers have lightened up on their guidelines as well . If you like a little bud from time to time , HERE ARE THE TIPS I have wen looking for life insurance : 1 -RRB- BE UPFRONT . You 're going to have to pee in a cup and donate a little blood . So do n't lie . Tell the agent you smoke !! 2 -RRB- Be honest about how much & how often . How much and how often is very important when picking the right carrier . If you have any more questions , reach out !! - gravy
Yes , you can smoke weed -LRB- marijuana -RRB- and get life insurance as long as you do not have a history of substance abuse . You will most likely have to pay smoker rates , just as a social cigarette smoker would pay , but they can be as good as Preferred Smoker premiums if your health is good and you do not overindulge .
You can smoke weed and get life insurance . For those of you that are a bit confused , `` weed '' is not the weeds that grow in your grass . It is a slang , but accepted term for marijuana . It is likely that your rate may be higher and the last time you smoked will impact the rate you pay .
You can smoke weed and get life insurance . For those of you that are a bit confused , `` weed '' is not the weeds that grow in your grass . It is a slang , but accepted term for marijuana . It is likely that your rate may be higher and the last time you smoked will impact the rate you pay .
Yes , you can usually get life insurance if you smoke weed . If you smoke it daily , or have had drug treatment and still use weed , or have had recent numerous traffic violations or DUI and smoke pot , then your marijuana use could cause you to be declined . But moderate cannabis use without other complicating issues will not affect your life insurance rating much , except for changing it to smoker rates with most companies .
Yes , you can smoke weed -LRB- marijuana -RRB- and get life insurance as long as you do not have a history of substance abuse . You will most likely have to pay smoker rates , just as a social cigarette smoker would pay , but they can be as good as Preferred Smoker premiums if your health is good and you do not overindulge .
You sure can toke and get life insurance ... . kinda ... Do n't take all our answers as a 100 % YES that you can ... . Since the time of the last posts , a LOT has happened politically around the subject of weed . Some life insurance carriers have lightened up on their guidelines as well . If you like a little bud from time to time , HERE ARE THE TIPS I have wen looking for life insurance : 1 -RRB- BE UPFRONT . You 're going to have to pee in a cup and donate a little blood . So do n't lie . Tell the agent you smoke !! 2 -RRB- Be honest about how much & how often . How much and how often is very important when picking the right carrier . If you have any more questions , reach out !! - gravy
Life insurance companies do not usually test for rag weed , chick weed or dandelions . However , they do test for THC which is the active ingredient in marijuana . I can not speak to new underwriting stipulations in states like CO where recreational use is now legal , but in TN where it is illegal a person will have some issues . It is tested through a paramed exam with blood and urine samples taken .
There are agents that are only focused on their own needs -LRB- to make the sale -RRB- but usually they do n't last long in the business . They get weeded out . In the insurance business , customers are n't stuck with their decisions . It 's not like you bought a car or a swimming pool . Usually you have a monthly payment . You always have the first 30-days that you can cancel and get a full refund . After that you can still cancel and walk away . No one is stuck with something they ca n't get out of . So bad high pressure insurance agents usually do n't last long . They make sales but their sales fall off the books and their commissions become charge-backs . They starve out . The first thing you should do is not work with an agent that is less than 3-years in the business . That will eliminate 90 % of the bad ones right there . Most experienced agents make plenty of money . We do n't have to do the wrong thing because doing the right thing is very profitable for us .
When you are looking for life insurance in Oregon , the best life insurance is the one that has your best rate , is appropriate for your needs , and is from a highly rated company . There is no one life insurance company or product that fits that bill for everyone . To find your best quote , use a reliable agency to help you weed out the the bad options and let you choose from some good options for you .
The exams still vary from state to state and so does their `` hardness '' . Having taken and passed the exams in 3 different states over the years I can say that they are not examinations set to weed out all but the select few . While the standards have been raised in recent years , in my experience any reasonably intelligent person who pays attention in the class you have to take should be able to pass the licensing exam the first time they take it . If you flunk the Life & Health exam 3 times and are still fogging a mirror you definitely need to move on to some other career choice . All the hard stuff to learn about the Life and Health Insurance world comes to you after you 've gotten your license . The licensing process teaches you the basic terminology and rules of the road , it does n't teach you how to drive .
Usually , yes . Renters Insurance provides coverage for your personal belongings whether they are located in your home or outside of it . So for example if you have a folding picnic table stored in the detached garage located at the property you are renting and it is stolen , you should have coverage subject to your deductible . If on the other hand you are a landscaper and you do not have business property coverage to protect your tools and equipment and someone walks off with your weed whacker , that is business property and the loss probably will not be covered by your Renter 's Insurance .
That is a great question ! There are a lot of great companies out there to buy a policy from , and several that cater specifically to our Elder Citizens . There are some things that might help you weed out a few of them , like the financial strength of the company , -LRB- look for A to A + ratings by A.M. Best or Standard & Poors -RRB- , their main product line -LRB- If they are known for auto repairs , or lobbying for Elder Citizen rights , they may not do their best work on insurance , though they will have policies available to purchase . Be very careful to understand all of the details , and fine print before you buy one , please ! -RRB- , and their track record with your State 's department of Insurance -LRB- Look for complaints or citations -RRB- . The best thing to do is look for an independent agent who can do all of that work for you , and help you find a policy that is right for you . Thank you for asking !
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
The term life insurance brokerage market is fiercely competitive and offers a range of guaranteed premium periods like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . The non-rated health classifications are based on two categories : non-smoking and smoking . The non-smoking category is segmented into five sub categories : super preferred , preferred plus , preferred , standard plus and standard . The smoking category is segmented into three sub categories : preferred smoking , smoking and no-cigarette tobacco . Then theres the impaired risk categories classify mortality charges of insureds below the standard ratings , up to 16 tables . Your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition are all mitigating factors in premium pricing term life insurance . A nonsmoking super preferred male or female , age 25 purchasing 10 year guaranteed level term life insurance for $ 100,000 of coverage will pay around $ 80-85 a year .
It is amazing how a life insurance company can find out you smoke . They test urine and blood for cotinine/nicotine , if you take an exam . They usually do a phone interview if you do n't take an exam , so you have to state your smoking status both in writing and verbally . They may order medical records . I once had a client who turned out to be rated a smoker , and when I asked him about it , he said he did n't think there was any way the insurance company would find out because he did n't smoke for a month before the exam and even his doctor did not know he was a smoker . It turned out his wife had told his doctor he smoked ! He may have been able to contest that by taking a new exam , but he , of course , was back to smoking by then . If you smoke , just admit it . If you quit smoking later , you can apply for a rate reduction a year after smoking .
Fully underwritten life insurance policies require you to declare whether or not you use any tobacco products . Although cigars and pipes are smoked , the question seems to suggest cigarettes . Cigarette smoking shortens life expectancy , so smokers pay more for life insurance . If smoking is declared on the application and the life insurance company offers an underwriting decision after the due diligence process , a death claim will be paid . If the insured takes up smoking after the policy has been issued as a nonsmoker , the life insurance company will pay the claim . It is the circumvention of truth that may indeed be classified as fraud that could void the policy in certain states or reduce the death benefit based on smoker rates at the date of issue . Some occasional smokers attempt to beat the urine analysis detection of cotinine , the byproduct of nicotine , by not smoking 8-10 days before the exam banking on their body chemistry to purge the continine from their systems . But you would have to lie on the application . And again , lying on the application could be considered fraud in some states . My advice : There is one life insurance company that offers nonsmoking rates to smokers for three years in an attempt to give the insured time to quit smoking . We can help with that . But bottom line : do n't try to game the system .
Unfortunately , that is too broad a question to give a specific answer . I can however , point you in the right direction . Smoking status is just one factor in assessing risks and setting rates . Smokers usually will pay more than non-smokers . The reason for the word usually , as opposed to definitely , is that in Canada some companies approach smoking differently . In other words , they charge smokers different rates based on what and how much they smoke . For example , cigar smokers are generally permitted to smoke 1 cigar a month with many companies to still be considered `` non-smokers '' for insurance purposes . I suspect it is for purely competitive reasons for cigar-smoking golfers . However , a more realistic approach is allowing 50 cigars a year which some companies take . I suggest that you look at the online quoting services to get an idea and then work with a local independent agent / broker to get the right policy at the right price . It is very important that you are truthful when declaring your smoking status as the company can deny your claim if you are not . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
I can give you some examples from cases I have handled . I think you will be surprised . Many people assume they will not qualify for life insurance , and happily , they are wrong . It takes a lot . One fellow needed to purchase several million dollars of life insurance to cover a bank loan for his business . His business was a bar/restaurant . The night before his insurance exam , a few of his buddies came by to socialize a bit . They did cocaine . Of course , he tested positive . No insurance for him . He probably would have qualified for a guaranteed-issue burial policy . But the $ 25,000 would not have done him any good . He needed that bank loan . And he needed life insurance to get it . And you know what ? He didnt get the life insurance , and he didnt get the bank loan . He would have had to wait a few years before he became eligible again . Five years is the industry standard , but I probably couldve gotten it for him sooner . Another candidate also a business owner went to rehab for both drug and alcohol addiction . Unfortunately , he didnt schedule the necessary follow-ups after his treatment . Carriers were worried that a relapse would be right around the corner without the proper support system in place . He will also have to wait a year or two . Then you have people who have a number of serious illnesses that just arent sufficiently controlled . The combination of obesity , heart condition , diabetes , smoking etc. is wicked . Ive had people come to me with these factors in place , and then some . Has to be some measure of control . Otherwise , you look like a walking timebomb . These cases are extreme . Other cases seem scary but can be quite placeable . Pot smoking ? You can get a policy . Bankruptcy ? You can get a policy . On probation for a felony ? You can get a policy . Suspended drivers license ? You can get a policy . Travel to India , or South America , or rural China ? You can get a policy . Mountain climber ? You can get a policy . Deep water scuba diver ? You can get a policy . Of course , a number of important factors need to be in place , but on the overall , it can be done . Surprise !
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
end question
start question
annuities
How Much Does An Annuity Pay Per Month ?
How much does an annuity pay per month will depend on the amount of money that is put into the annuity and the growth rate . The higher the amount funding the annuity , the higher the payout . If you are referring to an annuity with an income rider , this vehicle will pay out a percentage of the income account , depending on the annuitant 's age when they turn on the income stream . An annuity is a excellent way to protect yourself from outliving your retirement savings .
There are many factors that go into determine what an annuity will payout per month . The primary factor is the type of annuity you have . Additionally , there are usually options associated with the payout of an annuity , so answering your question without more information is not possible . If you are considering an annuity payment , be sure to compare all of your options . Here are some general factors that go into determining annuity payments -LRB- not all apply to each type of annuity and payout option -RRB- : The amount put into the annuity The growth of the annuity over time The age of the person -LRB- s -RRB- at the time annuity payments begin The age of the spouse if a joint payout applies The length of time the payments are guaranteed to last
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost per person in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . You may also have options for group coverage through your employer . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
That depends on how long you could live without your paycheck . Long term disability insurance is designed to replace a portion of your income if you were to become sick or injured and could no longer work . Consider how much your ability to make an income is worth . If you make $ 50,000 per year and assuming you never got another raise and were planning on working for 30 more years , your income would be worth $ 1,500,000 -LRB- $ 50,000 X 30 -RRB- . This about it this way ... if your car is worth $ 15,000 and lets assume you pay $ 100 per month for car insurance . If your income is worth $ 1,500,000 , does n't it make sense to pay $ 100 per month for a long term disability policy to protect that ?
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
For most individuals , Medicare Part A will be premium-free . This happens if you 've hit your 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes . If you do n't hit this , the premium will be up to $ 426 per month . In 2014 , Individuals with Medicare Part B will pay anywhere from the minimum $ 104.90 per month -LRB- this is most individuals -RRB- , up to the maximum of $ 335.70 per month , depending on your income level -LRB- individuals with higher incomes pay a higher premium due to the high-income penalty on Part B premium calculations -RRB- . So for those with only Parts A & B , the `` average '' person will likely be paying $ 104.90 per month between the two . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan , you will have additional premium expenses -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much a specific individual should be paying for health insurance is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
For most individuals , Medicare Part A will be premium-free . This happens if you 've hit your 40 credits -LRB- working life/paying FICA taxes -RRB- . If you do n't hit this , the premium will be up to $ 426 per month . In 2014 , Individuals with Medicare Part B will pay anywhere from the minimum $ 104.90 per month -LRB- this is most individuals -RRB- , up to the maximum of $ 335.70 per month , depending on your income level -LRB- individuals with higher incomes pay a higher premium due to the high-income penalty on Part B premium calculations -RRB- . So for those with only Parts A & B , the `` average '' person will likely be paying $ 104.90 per month between the two . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
Starting Jan. 1st , 2014 , the tax penalty for not having health insurance is $ 95 per person for the year , up to 3 persons max per household and where dependents under 21 count as half a person ; or 1 % of annual income , whichever is greater ... So , a family of 4 or more , would only pay a max of $ 285 in 2014 -LRB- $ 95 x 2adults = $ 190 , plus 2 children at $ 47.50 = $ 95 , for a total of $ 285 -RRB- . But , for a single individual non-dependent , they would most likely pay the 1 % of income , up to the $ 285 max -LRB- i.e. a single 33yr old with $ 22,000 annual income would pay 1 % or $ 220 for the year , because $ 220 is greater than the $ 95 per person and below the $ 285 max household -RRB- . After 2014 the tax penalty increases to $ 325 in 2015 , or 2 % of income up to $ 975 max -LRB- 3x $ 325 -RRB- . Followed by $ 695 in 2016 , or 2.5 % of income up to $ 2,085 max -LRB- 3x $ 695 -RRB- ; and then adjusted to Cost of Living Increases thereafter . Also , the penalty can be prorated . So , if you are only uninsured for 1 month out of the year where a penalty would be applied , you would only pay one month 's worth of penalties -LRB- i.e. For 2014 , if you miss one month you would pay $ 95/12 = $ 7.92 per person , or 1 % of your income/12 -RRB- . And due to the application processes and effective dates for insurance , one day of being uninsured , equals one month . So , be very aware of when you apply for insurance and when it will take effect . It 's best to work with an insurance agent or broker , and an accountant , to calculate the exact tax implications for your individual situation ; to assure that you are indeed responsible to pay the tax or if you are exempt from it .
How much does an annuity pay per month will depend on the amount of money that is put into the annuity and the growth rate . The higher the amount funding the annuity , the higher the payout . If you are referring to an annuity with an income rider , this vehicle will pay out a percentage of the income account , depending on the annuitant 's age when they turn on the income stream . An annuity is a excellent way to protect yourself from outliving your retirement savings .
How much does the average person pay for life insurance ? Based on my 32 years in the business as a broker -LRB- and there is no right or best answer -RRB- , I would estimate between $ 15 and $ 150 per month . This is , of course , `` per person . '' Term policies are much cheaper than permanent policies and of course that would impact the amount each person pays . And ... each person has different amounts of coverage they carry . You can purchase term coverage for under $ 100 per year depending on age and face amount . But because of economies of scale , that may not be such a good idea . You may be able to double the coverage for slightly more . Quite simply , there will be tremendous variations in the amount that consumers pay for their coverage . A fully-licensed -LRB- full-time -RRB- broker will help you find the lowest prices .
If Medicare did n't exist , health insurance care for seniors would be covered in the same marketplace as the under 65 persons - in short , the private sector . However , the premiums would be substantially higher than what they pay today for Original Medicare and any supplemental coverage programs , including prescriptions -LRB- a big expense -RRB- . During your working life , you 're paying FICA taxes - after you 've hit the 40 quarters mark -LRB- 10 working years -RRB- , your Part A coverage is premium-free . If you had to pay for it out of pocket , it would be $ 426 per month -LRB- in 2014 -RRB- . Your Part B coverage requires a premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -RRB- and you would pay a premium for any supplemental coverage - supplement plans are provided by private insurance companies . The idea of paying taxes all these years for it is so that you 're slowly paying for it in advance so you 're not hit with a massive premium bill in the future that you may not have prepared for . In summary , a senior citizen could end up paying somewhere in the neighborhood of $ 800 + per month per person with everything factored in -LRB- probably higher -RRB- if Medicare did n't exist . As a current or future recipient of Medicare , I bet you 're glad it exists . In the future , however , programs and benefits may have to make changes given the baby boomer generation hitting the retirement ages and going on Medicare - the baby boomer is the largest generation and can create a situation where the funds going out to pay for Medicare are larger than the funds coming in through taxes . Only time will tell on this aspect though . If you have any questions about Medicare supplemental plans , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or call me at 703-665-9133 .
The cost of life insurance is extremely variable based on one 's age , health , and the type of policy one purchases . The premium for a $ 100,000 policy can range from a few dollars per month to hundreds of dollars per month , depending on these variables . A good place to start is to look at how much you need , and also how much you can afford to spend on life insurance . You do n't want to get in over your head and have to drop the policy in a short time . But if your family or business would suffer without you , it is an important purchase worth budgeting for , too .
Starting Jan. 1st , 2014 , the tax penalty for not having health insurance is $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- up to 3 persons max per household , and where dependents under 21 count as half a person -RRB- or 1 % of annual income , whichever is greater . But , for the Initial Open Enrollment Period , you have from Oct. 1st , 2013 to March 31st , 2014 to sign up for a plan to avoid the penalty ... For example , a family of 4 or more , would only pay a max of $ 285 in 2014 -LRB- $ 95 x 2 adults = $ 190 , plus 2 children at $ 47.50 = $ 95 , for a total of $ 285 -RRB- . But , for a single individual , they would most likely pay the 1 % of income , up to the $ 285 max -LRB- i.e. a single 33yr old with $ 22,000 annual income would pay 1 % or $ 220 for the year , because $ 220 is greater than the $ 95 per person and below the $ 285 max household -RRB- . After 2014 the tax penalty increases to $ 325 in 2015 , or 2 % of income up to $ 975 max -LRB- 3x $ 325 -RRB- . Followed by $ 695 in 2016 , or 2.5 % of income up to $ 2,085 max -LRB- 3x $ 695 -RRB- ; and then adjusted to Cost of Living Increases thereafter . Also , the penalty can be prorated . So , if you are only uninsured for 1 month out of the year where a penalty would be applied , you would only pay one month 's worth of penalties -LRB- i.e. For 2014 , if you miss one month you would pay $ 95/12 = $ 7.92 per person , or 1 % of your income/12 -RRB- . And due to the application processes and effective dates for insurance , one day of being uninsured , equals one month . So , be very aware of when you apply for insurance and when it will take effect . It 's best to work with an insurance agent or broker , and an accountant , to calculate the exact tax implications for your individual situation ; to assure that you are indeed responsible to pay the tax or if you are exempt from it .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is PTD Life Insurance ?
PTD in life insurance stands for Permanent and Total Disability . It is a feature of some policies in some European countries that provides the Insured a regular payment if they are permanently disabled -LRB- unable to do their own job , or any job , depending on the type of policy purchased -RRB- .
PTD in life insurance stands for Permanent and Total Disability . It is a feature of some policies in some European countries that provides the Insured a regular payment if they are permanently disabled -LRB- unable to do their own job , or any job , depending on the type of policy purchased -RRB- .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
If you were to cover every contingency of life with life insurance , you probably could not afford that much . Life insurance is a wonderful resource for the `` what if 's '' of life , but the `` what if 's '' can be endless . What if you died leaving your family without your income . What if before you died , you used up all your savings on doctor bills . Then , what if your spouse died shortly after you . What if the person you designated to care for your children , had just lost their job . What if ... . No one can have enough life insurance to cover every possible tragedy . But you can have enough life insurance to give your loved ones a chance . Providing them with enough income to give them time to adjust to life without you , without having to worry about getting a new job -LRB- or adding a second job to the one they already have -RRB- , is a good place to start . Giving them enough to live on until your children are grown , or for 10 years , is also a reasonable amount .
A nearly impossible question to answer . How much premium can you afford ? What carrier are you purchasing coverage with ? What is your health/medical history ? What is your family/medical history ? What is your occupation ? What is your geographic location ? What is you age ? What is you height/weight ? These are just some of the factors used to determine the amount of coverage and the premium that you would pay for that coverage ; that a carrier might use . Most carriers will handle coverage rates up to one million on a regular basis . Contact a local agent to find out what would be available to you .
here is a good chance you will . Lets cover some of the what ifs : What if you need to maximize your pension distribution by taking it out during your lifetime only ? Life insurance will help you cover your spouse . What if you have any remaining debts , such as a second mortgage ? Or if you have any dependents , such as a child who still need some financial assistance ? Life insurance would protect them . What if you want a really strong guaranteed portion of your asset portfolio ? The guarantees in life insurance cash value contracts are very competitive . What if your net worth is high and you want to preserve your estate from federal and state taxation ? Life insurance would allow you to protect your assets and still pay the government . What if you have formed very strong ties with a charity , and would like to support it as a legacy ? Life insurance can turn a comparatively small premium into a very substantial gift for them . Its kind of surprising , isnt it , about how our need for life insurance can basically last our entire life !
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
It depends on many factors , but here are the main factors for price . 1 -RRB- What 's the policy type ? 2 -RRB- What 's the face amount ? 3 -RRB- What 's your gender ? 4 -RRB- What 's your age ? 5 -RRB- What 's your general health like ? 6 -RRB- Are you a tobacco user ? What you should look at are basically two main questions . What does the life insurance cover and how much do I need ? Cost is a factor for a policy , but it 's much more important to get the right policy with the riders you 'll need .
1 . Is there an annual deductible ? 2 . What is the maximum annual out of pocket costs ? 3 . What does it cost to see a doctor ? 4 . What is the cost of lab work and x-rays ? 5 . What is the cost of outpatient surgery ? 6 . What is the cost of a hospital stay ? 7 . What are the wellness benefits ? 8 . What do prescription drugs cost ? The most important question to ask with respect to buying health insurance now is are my doctors in the network ?
Where you should buy Term Life is from an independent life insurance broker . What type depends on a number of factors : what you want the coverage to cover , for how long , is there a chance you would want to convert the coverage to permanent . I suggest you contact an independent life insurance broker who can give you a quote after discussing what the coverage is needed for . Do not forget to ask what are your options when the term renews . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Typically , yes . But lets cover some of the what ifs . What if you had no history of cancer , but then unfortunately come down with it after you take the policy ? Youre covered . What if you had a history of cancer , but didnt disclose it to the broker when you applied ? Nor did you tell him or the examiner about any doctors who treated you ? Thats a big no-no . Thats insurance fraud . The carrier could contest the claim in the first two years . To tell you the truth , they might even come after you after that . What if you just completed cancer treatment last year ? Carriers typically like to wait 2 to 5 years before making an offer . However , I have seen offers made sooner , under exceptional conditions . What if you are a woman , and you have no history of breast cancer , but it runs in your family ? With all other things being equal , you could certainly be eligible for coverage now . But the family history might preclude you from getting the rock-bottom rates -LRB- sorry - blame the actuaries :-RRB- What if you have an accident-only policy ? No coverage for illnesses such as cancer . But what if you had cancer , but tragically the cause of death was a plane crash ? Different story .
Only you can answer this question of Life Insurance being essential . For those of us who see the financial loss in families who lost a parent or spouse , Life Insurance relieves financial stress allowing you to take care of what is most important , your family . YES , I believe life insurance is essential . Life Insurance provides you or rather your beneficiary with monies otherwise would not be available . You need to look at what is important in your life , who depends on you , your family , perhaps your business and look at what will happen if you are not there `` tomorrow '' . What will happen financially and how would you relieve that financial stress .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
What will disqualify you from life insurance ? Well depends on you mean by disqualify as there are many forms of life insurance out there at many different price levels . There are guaranteed issue plans , credit life and a few that will insure a person for a very high premium . What you might be asking instead is what will disqualify you from the best possible rates for life insurance ? Your health is what will get you very good rates or high rates if your health is poor . There are also possible issues with travel , credit and occupations and hobbies . But , the best price is usually tied to best possible health . You are your discount .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Flood Damage Covered Under Homeowners Insurance ?
One word - No . Damage caused by Flood is a specific and extremely common if not universal exclusion in Homeowners policies . Though it may be possible to endorse your policy to cover damage caused by a failure of a drainage system , there is no endorsement for flood . That protection is only available by purchasing a Flood Insurance policy
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
Flood insurance or coverage for a flood is not included in a homeowners insurance policy and is in fact specifically excluded . There is only one option for flood protection and that is to purchase a flood policy . Almost all insurance companies can write you a flood policy but the policy is underwritten though FEMA . Which ever insurance company you currently work with on your homeowners insurance should be able to set you up with a flood policy . Unless there is a close of escrow you have a 30 day wait before a flood policy can become active so no waiting until the storm hits to purchase a flood policy . Flood is not to be mixed up with water damage which is covered under a homeowners policy . An example of water damage would be a pipe that burst in the home .
Insurance covers specified perils . Water damage is the result of an event . Everything depends upon what caused the water damage . If the damage is caused by the sudden rupture of water pipes inside the home , the damage is covered by most homeowners policies . If the damage is caused by the overflow of a toilet , the loss would be excluded by most homeowners policies . Incidentally , many insurance companies will provide coverage for the overflowing of a toilet if an extension to coverage is purchased at an increased premium . If the loss is caused by water enter the house from outside it is most likely not going to be covered . Flood insurance , an additional insurance policy is required to cover this type of loss . While it is true that flood damage is not always clear cut , it is important to note that almost one quarter of all property claims involve flood damage in the United States . The purchase of a flood policy is a wise move regardless of where you are located . I have seen desert towns inundated as well as mountain communities . In some places flooding is common .
Homeowners policies contain a specific exclusion for the peril `` Flood '' . Flood is defined as , `` A flood is a general and temporary condition where two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties are inundated by water or mudflow . '' Maybe people confuse `` flood '' as a peril as compared to `` flooding '' of a basement or floor . If , for example , a pipe were to burst and `` flood '' the basement that would be a covered loss under a Standard HO-3 Homeowners Insurance Policy . It would cover the damage to the dwelling and your contents but not the cost to replace the pipe itself . Hope this helps
To have flood covered by any type of renters or homeowners coverage , you must have a special flood policy . Your homeowners and renters will cover water damage due to sewer backup , burst pipes , or rain damage from a leaking roof , it will not cover flood . There is a special Federal Flood Insurance program you can look in to if you live in a flood zone .
To claim water damage with your homeowner 's insurance , simply contact your company and explain to them that you have water damage and that you would like to file a claim . But one thing to keep in mind is that not every type of loss associated with water is covered by a homeowner 's policy . Most water losses that are covered happen suddenly -LRB- burst pipe , washing machine overflow , etc. -RRB- and are not from slowly developing things -LRB- slow dripping pipe -RRB- . Things like floods and tidal water are not covered under a homeowner 's policy and require coverage from a separate flood insurance policy . The best thing you can do for a loss related to water is mitigate the damages as quickly as possible , and prevent any further damages from occurring . Thanks for asking !
If you are talking about water seeping in through the foundation ; it is not typically covered under your homeowners policy . Flood insurance is available to cover for damage due to flooding and is required most financial institutions if you property is in a flood plain . Flood insurance handled through the Federal government and sold through individual insurance companies . Most homeowners policies due offer a special endorsement for Sump pump failure and/or sewer backup . Every policy is different . Please read your policy entirely to determine your policies coverage and exclusions or contact your local agent to have them explain the coverages contained in your policy .
It is always a good idea to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy , but most modern Homeowners Insurance provide protection from a very broad variety of covered perils . So much so , it is almost easier to explain the two common things that it does not cover . The two most common exclusions in a Homeowners policy are for damage caused by Earth Movement and damage caused by Flood . In most cases , coverage for earth movement may be endorsed onto your policy but coverage for flood damage is only available by the purchase of a Flood Insurance policy .
NOTHING ! So good question . Flood is outside ground water entering your home through windows and doors , NOT seepage thru cracks or failure of the sump pump . Flood damage is covered only with a flood insurance policy and coverage for flood damage to any area of the home is very limited . Seepage is not going to be covered at all . And coverage for water damage due to sump pump failure is not typically an automatic coverage on homeowners insurance but usually an available option . Talk to you insurance professional , he/she can help .
You are going to have to determine what caused the damages and submit a claim appropriately . For example there may be water damage of a broken pipe or water damage form a flood . both are water damage but both are not typically covered under the homeowners policy . A broken pipe from say a freeze loss would be typically covered . A flood from a nearby stream would not be covered . In property insurance you may have contents to list and produce a notice of loss . Such an inventory is hard to do after the damage occurs . for that reason we recommend keeping an inventory of your important household goods away form your premises in a safe place .
Home Owners Insurance DOES NOT COVER FLOODING . Depending what `` flood plain your home is located you can purchase flood insurance reasonably or if you are in a high risk area for flooding your vacation plans may have to be changed . Under no circumstances should you be assuming this risk and please also remember EARTHQUAKE DAMAGE IS NOT COVERED BY HOMEOWNERS
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
If this question is referring to flood as in rising water then a homeowners policy will not cover flood damage . Only a flood policy will give you this coverage . If the so called flood was just a bursting pipe in the home then this type of loss would be covered by your homeowners policy .
There are a few types of coverage to consider . First of course is a Homeowners ' Insurance Policy . This will be required by your mortgage company and it provides broad loss coverage on your new home and your personal belongings as well as liability protection for you and your family in the event you happen to be legally responsible for someone 's injury or damage to their property . Next , and this may be required depending upon the location of your home , is Flood Insurance . Flood damage is NEVER covered under a homeowners ' policy so if required , it means you are located in a higher risk flood zone . If not required it is still a good idea to consider . Finally , look into Life Insurance to protect your family in the event you die before your mortgage is paid off .
Approximately 25 % of the property damage annually in the USA is flood related . Most homeowners policies exclude damage caused by flood . Many of these companies work with the federal flood insurance program administered by FEMA . Many lenders require flood insurance , particularly if the home is in a flood plain .
It depends on the origin and cause of the water . A distinction has to be made between flooding and water damage . A flood is usually caused by external water rising , usually from heavy rain or a river overflowing . Flood is not covered by most homeowner policies . Water damage is generally defined as water hitting your home before touching the outside ground . It can originate from a roof leaf or a broken pipe and is usually covered by homeowners insurance .
Structural damagee that is caused by a covered loss that is outlined in your policy would be covered under the terms and conditions of your policy . This really needs to be discussed with your insurance professional directly . There are things that can cause structural damage to a home that are outside of the areas that are covered in a Homeowners policy . Things like earth movement and Flood are standard exclusions for examle . You can include coverage for Earth movement in your homeowners policy in most cases , but Flood Insurance is always a separate and specific policy that needs to be purchased separately . Again talk to your insurance professional or check our the FEMA website and look for `` Flood Smart Certified '' Insurance Professionals in your area .
Niether homeowners or renters insurnace will cover flood damage under normal circumstances . To get flood insurance coverage it must be purchased from a carrier that is appointed bye the federal government . Only select carriers provide flood insurance coverage and agents must be appointed with one of those carriers to be able to sell flood insurance coverage .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medigap Plan F Cover Physical Therapy ?
MediGap Plan F policies are designed to pick up the 20 % that Medicare does n't cover in exchange for a monthly premium . The plans are standardized and are required to cover all of the approved services covered by Medicare Parts A & B. Physical Therapy is considered an outpatient rehabilitative service . This category is a Medicare covered benefit which includes Occupational Therapy , Physical Therapy , Speech and Language Therapy .
MediGap Plan F policies are designed to pick up the 20 % that Medicare does n't cover in exchange for a monthly premium . The plans are standardized and are required to cover all of the approved services covered by Medicare Parts A & B. Physical Therapy is considered an outpatient rehabilitative service . This category is a Medicare covered benefit which includes Occupational Therapy , Physical Therapy , Speech and Language Therapy .
Yes . Medicare Part B does provide coverage for physical therapy , but there are cap limits for therapy services - $ 1,920 for physical therapy -LRB- cap for services combined with speech-language therapy -RRB- . If the services are deemed medically necessary -LRB- and documented -RRB- by your therapist , you would not be responsible for costs above the $ 1,920 cap . If you 're getting physical therapy services that are not medically necessary , then Medicare will not pay for the services . Medicare would be paying for approximately 80 % of the costs and you would be responsible for the other 20 % , after the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay the Part B deductible and the 20 % costs for physical therapy services .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
According to the 2014 Medicare and You handbook distributed by CMS , physical therapy is a limited Medicare approved item . Medicare covers an evaluation and treatment for any injury or disease that changes your ability to function -LRB- provided a doctor approves your need for physical therapy -RRB- . There may be a limit on the amount Medicare will pay for physical therapy services in a single year . Most Medigap Plans will pay the remaining 20 % that Original Medicare does not pay for Medicare approved physical therapy .
Physican therapy is covered under Medicare Part B , but there are cap limits for therapy services - $ 1,920 for physical therapy -LRB- cap for services combined with speech-language therapy -RRB- . If the services are deemed medically necessary -LRB- and documented -RRB- by your therapist , you would not be responsible for costs above the $ 1,920 cap.If you 're getting physical therapy services that are not medically necessary , then Medicare will not pay for the services . Medicare would be paying for approximately 80 % of the costs and you would be responsible for the other 20 % , after the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay the Part B deductible and the 20 % costs for physical therapy services .
Medicare does indeed cover physical therapy , occupational therapy and speech therapy . Medicare does impose limits on how much they will pay . Apparently at some point they think you have had enough and need to suck it up . In 2013 the limits are $ 1900 for physical and speech therapy combined . OT limits are $ 1900 . I told my doctor I broke my leg in two places . He told me to quit going to those places . Ba-da-bing
Does Health Insurance Cover Therapy ? It depends on the type of therapy . Most quality group plans will cover physical , physiological or other types of therapy . If you have an individual health plan pre-2014 I would check your benefit details , because many of the old policies did not cover therapy . Post-2014 plans tend to have stronger coverage . Request your summary of benefits and Coverage to see how the specific therapy treatment is covered under your benefits . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
The `` best '' Medigap policy is plan F because it covers all benefits at 100 % from day 1 . Plan G is competitive with plan F because it covers everything just like plan F except for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The predictability in healthcare expenses these 2 plans have created for people have made these the 2 most desireable plans to have . In general , you would start by looking at the benefits you want to have covered . If you want to just write a check for a premium and not have to worry about big hospitals when you need procedures and surgeries done , you should consider plan F or plan G . If you 're willing to share more of the risk of expenses to lower your premium , you may want to consider a plan N or plan Hi-F . Refer to the Medigap guidebook -LRB- available on the Medicare.gov website - you can also email me for a copy and I 'll forward it to you -RRB- . Once you 've determined which of the 11 available Medigap plans you want to purchase , the next factor to look at is price . Every Medigap plan gets paid in the exact same way , regardless of the insurance company you have the insurance through . For example , if company A is charging $ 125 per month for a plan F and company B is charging $ 150 per month for a plan F , you would want to buy the plan F from company A because they 're saving you $ 25 per month and the benefits are the exact same either way . Please remember , if you 're applying outside of your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare , you may be subject to medical underwriting and have to answer the health questions . This is where an independent Medigap insurance broker really comes in handy as they can shop the case for you among many companies instead of just 1 or 2 to make sure you get the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap plan -LRB- I 'm an independent Medigap broker -RRB- and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is the most comprehensive coverage available for seniors . There are items not covered or partially covered . If Medicare approves treatment , Medigap Plan F will cover copays , co-insurance and deductibles related to that specific item . However , if any treatment is denied coverage by Medicare , that particular treatment would not be covered by Medigap Plan F. Simply put , Plan F follows the lead of approved Medicare coverage . Items typically not covered by Plan F include acupuncture , dental work , vision exams and skilled nursing care beyond the first 100 days . There is also a limit on the total number of hospitalization days covered - it 's around 455 days under Plan F . If you are hospitalized and require blood , Plan F covers the first 3 pints . If you are travelling abroad and have a medical emergency , Plan F usually requires you to pay a $ 250 deductible but will cover up to $ 50,000 . Drug coverage is not included with Plan F -LRB- that would be Plan D -RRB- .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Most people enjoy Medigap Plan F because of it 's comprehensive health coverage and consider it to be the best Medigap policy . Medigap Plan F will pay all your Medicare approved charges that Original Medicare Part A and Part B does n't cover . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance with Plan F . There is a lot of talk about Medigap Plan G becoming the `` best '' Medigap Plan . It works just like Plan F by covering all your Medicare approved charges not paid by Original Medicare -- after you 've satisfied the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium with Plan G is usually much less than Plan F. Even when you add in the Part B deductible there is still savings for the same Medigap benefits . If I can assist you with your specific Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Home Prices Are Down So Why Not Insurance ?
Home prices do not reflect the cost of reconstruction . Insurance is there to rebuild your home if it is damaged . Most claims are not total losses . It is always the rebuilding process that is expensive . It is expensive to make a kitchen that has been damaged by fire look like it never happened .
A lot of factors go in to the cost of insuring a home . The market value of a house is not one of them . Some of the major factors of the cost of insurance are : 1 -RRB- the cost to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss . -LRB- Building materials , labor ... -RRB- Although home prices have decreased in much of the country the cost of building homes has not necessarily decreased . 2 -RRB- the likelihood of a loss in that area -LRB- proximity to brush fire and fire departments , likelihood of a natural disaster , number of break-ins ... -RRB- 3 -RRB- prior claims filed on that house or by the person seeking insurance 4 -RRB- value of the contents inside the house .
Market value has no bearing on replacement cost to rebuild your home . In many areas of the country with the hit on the economy homes can actually be purchased for less then the cost to build . If insurance companies only paid on market value many people would find themselves tens of thousands if not hundreds of thousands dollars short if there was a total loss .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Pricing for homeowners varies more than the amount of problems in a math book . A few factors that insurance companies consider are : age of home , zip code , quality of home , credit of the occupants , driving records of the occupants , if you have multiple policies with the carrier , age of occupants in the home , age of the roof , improvements to the home , security system ... the list goes on and on so this is why there can be so many variants and no two people are really alike when it comes to pricing so there is no way to say exactly what the price is until you let a company give you quotes and truly run the numbers for you .
If you have term life insurance it has no cash value . That would make the answer very simple . No one can take that from you . So your life insurance would remain secure while in a nursing home , if it is term insurance , so long as you can find a way to continue to pay the premiums . The more interesting question is what if you have permanent or cash value life insurance ? These policies build up value , and can actually be sold , or surrendered for cash . A nursing home might want that money . Depending on the nursing home and their contract with you , they might require you to pay them from such proceeds , but there is no legal requirement that you do so for them , and you can , of course , go to a different nursing home . The harder question is what if you have no or little other assets , and are planning to enter a government assisted facility ? Medicare will NOT pay for long term care , but MediCal will , but you will need to spend down your assets . So the question arises , if you are required to spend down your assets , will you have to sell the life insurance policy -LRB- meaning surrender its cash value -RRB- in order to stay in a MediCal nursing home . The answer to that very narrow specific question can change from time to time , as the MediCal rules change . But know that if you wish to claim impoverishment , and you retain ownership of a substantial cash value asset , you should expect the government to demand that you sell it and use the proceeds to pay for your care . Tread carefully . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
The reason why landlords want insurance is to protect themselves for either property loss or a liability suit . If you are a tenant in a commercial building and a client of yours gets hurt on your premises then that client may potentially sue you . If you have no insurance the client may sue the building owner just because it 's the landlords building even though the tenant may be the party who caused the loss . Same is true for private residences . The landlord does not want to take on a suit because your friend fell down in your home . Now for the record , just because the victim goes after the landlord does not mean you are off the hook as a tenant . If the landlords insurance ends up having to pay a claim you can almost surely bet they are coming after you so my suggestion is carry the insurance . There are way to many upsides and virtually no down side .
The cost of Term Life Insurance varies greatly , from a few dollars per month , to thousands of dollars per month . Some of the variable that affect the price are : 1 -RRB- Age 2 -RRB- Gender 3 -RRB- Tobacco use 4 -RRB- Build 5 -RRB- Health 6 -RRB- Other risk factors 7 -RRB- Face amount of policy 8 -RRB- Term length -LRB- generally speaking , the longer you lock in the premium , the higher the premium will be -RRB- 9 -RRB- Whether you use a policy that requires an exam , or do not require an exam . For people with excellent health , taking an exam can usually bring down the price . 10 -RRB- The company you use . Some companies are better for certain ages , term lengths , risk factors , etc , than other . That is why shopping with a broker who carries many choices can help you get the lowest price on your term life insurance .
Why not buy whole life insurance ? Well , you know you 're right , why not ? It is the only policy you actually control , they ca n't take it away or price you out of it . They ca n't make changes without your permission , they ca n't really do anything because you control the policy . That is why whole life is more expensive than other types of coverage . The insurance company is giving up control to the insured , so would they price that low or high ? There are a ton of other reasons as well , but I want to keep this brief .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
When you ask which life insurance is best in Illinois there are a lot of thing to consider . First of all why are you buying the policy ? Are you buying it to pay your house off if you die , to pay for a funeral , to leave your family with extra money to help them re-adjust their life after you die or are you buying it as a retirement vehicle to replace your 401K . When you figure outthe why , then we can start to narrow down which company has that type of insurance to meet your needs . My years of experience has taught methat there is no one company that can meet all the individual needs of every person . I always look at the WHY first , then I can educate you on the different companies that could fit your needs . If you need more help feel free to Skype me or call 630-918-1673
Homeowners insurance is not a one size fits all policy . The cost of home insurance is determined based on your claim history , type of house , age , condition and in some states credit . In Virgina , your credit score is a big factor when determining rate . Your agent also has to complete a Replacement cost calculation -LRB- the cost to rebuild your home -RRB- . The Replacement cost is not the purchase price or assessment value but rather how much it would cost the insurance company to rebuild your home . This amount can be more than the purchase price in some area especially with older homes . There are several variables to considered so it 's always best to sit down with an independent agent to review your options .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
Why should you buy coverage for a new baby ? Well three basic reasons may apply as to `` why '' ? First , if you were to lose your child , what would you do ? Would you go into work on Monday ? Would you and your spouse agree on the cost of the service and headstone ? Sorry to be blunt . A life insurance policy lets you take a breath , decide on your service and reduces the `` what can we afford to do ? '' in the situation . Second , you can purchase guaranteed insurability for your child 's future when you build your policy . These options take away the insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child 's future purchases , no matter their health . Finally , depending on your choice of policy , you get your child a foothold in their financial future . You are knocking out one of the foundation pieces to a financial future while the price is super cheap . One of many things down , more choices for other dollars later .
Boy there are any number of reasons that I can offer to illustrate why our car insurance , or any insurance for that matter , may go up , or down for that matter . Major factors in pricing usually include one 's age , drivng experience , driving history , claims history , etc. . You may pay more for car insurance in certain areas of the country than others based upon population , company experience within those territories etc. . Naturally another major factor is the year , make model and type of car that you drive and insure . Finally , over the years , it has become common and accepted to include one 's credit history among the many factors that a company uses in order to consider and properly price a car insurance policy .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
That 's a great question ! Let 's answer it this way : How would you be financially if you purchase your home , take out a big mortgage to pay for it , buy new furniture and appliances to fill the house , get all of your belongings in it , and then it catches fire and is gone ? Would you be able to start from scratch and repay the mortgage ? Or how about if a visitor fell down some steps in your home , and had to be hospitalized . Would you be able to pay the bills and possible law suit damages that you are liable for ? These are two really good reasons why homeowners is important , and most lenders will not sign off on your mortgage unless their investment is protected somehow . I hope that helps you decide to insure your home . Thank you for asking !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Premiums Rise In 2014 ?
I 'm not sure if you 're referring to Part B , Medicare Supplements , Medicare Advantage Plans or Part D drug coverage . In any scenario , it 's a little early to tell , as the plans for 2014 have not been released yet . But this is exactly why we have open enrollment ... to see thecost & coveragefor the upcoming year and make coverage changes if desired . So your definitive answer will come starting October 15th .
The cost of Medicare will almost certainly go up in 2014 . The cost of health care is rising , the population is aging and not getting any healthier . In addition , utilization of medical services continues to rise at a staggering rate . Unless Congress yields to political pressure , you should anticipate your Medicare Part A and Part B deductibles to rise along with your Part B premium . The only remaining question is , how much will these costs rise ?
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Health insurance premiums vary considerably from plan to plan and individual to individual . Your age , zip code , plan design , tobacco use , height and weight and general health will be factored in determining your final rate and total annual cost . Obamacare will change a lot of this in 2014 when rates are expected to rise considerably . In some situations , individual major medical plan premiums will double or more .
Effective 01 January 2014 , Health Insurance Companies will only be able to deny coverage for non payment of premium ! The Affordable Care Act also known as ObamaCare has made drastic changes to the way our industry operates and underwrites risk . We will no longer be able to pick and choose clients ; if clients can not afford insurance and qualify for assistance , the taxpayers will foot the bill , if clients want to take their Federal tax deduction up front monthly , it will be provided as a discount to their monthly premium . In addition , there are 10 required ` essential health benefits ' that must be included in all health plans thereby driving up premium whether or not one needs the coverage . Clients have the choice of purchasing a plan ` On Exchange ' or ` Off Exchange ' -LRB- the traditional way -RRB- . Please notethat this is not a National Health system as witnessed in operation in many other countries . This is simply a Nationally recognized andgoverned exchange whereby insurance carriers can provide an approved plan on an exchange where clients can select the plan . The plan codes are differenton exchange than plans off exchange . It remains to be seen if clients on exchange will be treated the same as clients off the exchange . In the month of November , 39 % of those applying to the exchange in California were on some type of assistance -LRB- MediCal -RRB- . If the exchange continues to support only those on assistance and olderAmericans with health issues , it would be conceivable that premium rates would need to sharply rise to avoid bankrupting the exchange . The vast majority of those contacting their insurance companies to make changes have expressed dismay with the new system of managing the health insuranceindustry . The truth remains to be judged by history !
When term life insurance ends , the premium rises drastically or the policy simply ends . When the premium rises at the end of the term , it is no longer locked in and can raise annually . Rather than wait for the term to end and the premium to jump up , you might want to look into converting your policy to permanent life insurance . Whether you convert your policy to permanent before the term ends , or pay the new annually renewable premium at the end of the term , your premium will be substantially higher . But by converting you can lock in your premium for a longer period of time .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
It will depend on whether your policy covers maternity or not . Usually complications of pregnancy would be covered but not necessarily normal pregnancy . Check your policy or call your company . Beginning in 2014 maternity is a requirement according to the new health care mandates for minimum required coverage . This is part of the reasons you will see cost of health insurance rise .
You always need to check with your annuity provider before using any quotes . Currently : the 5 year rate is 2.95 % , the 7 year is 3.20 % and the ten year rate is 3.25 % . It doesnt make much sense to lock down a ten year rate for an extra 35 basis points over the five year rate . The recent Fed statements have generated speculation that rates in 2014 are going to rise .
Medicare does not have a donut hole . Perhaps you are thinking of Medicare Part D , the private prescription drug plan . In 2013 the Part D donut hole is $ 2970 . Under Obamacare the donut hole will gradually close a little each year until 2020 when the hole will close completely . Of course there is a cost associated with transferring donut hole risk to the carrier . Medicare Part D premiums will rise , copay 's will rise and drug tiers will shift resulting in higher out of pocket costs for those who use a lot of medications , especially if those drugs are higher priced .
The general answer to your question is `` Yes . '' Though the renewal policy varies from insurance carrier to insurance carrier and may also be impacted by insurance department requirements in your state . Most short term medical policies can be renewed at least once and with some carriers and in some states perhaps up to three times . As a consequence of rising health insurance rates for ObamaCare compliant individual major medical policies for persons who qualify for little or no premium subsidies in the government health insurance marketplaces the interest in Short Term Major Medical plans has increased significantly . Insurance carriers have been modifying their Short Term Medical policies to take advantage of this opportunity and so there are many more options being made available and being offered for longer terms -LRB- some up to 11 months -RRB- than has historically been the case in this product segment . Short Term Major Medical insurance can be an affordable option for individuals who can pass relatively simple underwriting screening and who have no pre-existing condition concerns . A person considering this option should seek the services of an insurance broker who represents multiple carriers and who can help you find the policy best suited to your needs . You should also be aware that a Short Term Major Medical Plan does not qualify as minimum essential coverage under the terms of the Affordable Care Act and that you will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 95 or 1 % of your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- on your 2014 taxes . However , this penalty can only be recovered from a tax refund and the premium savings may far outweigh any potential tax penalty some individuals might be faced with .
Adverse selection is the primary driver behind the need for the Affordable Care Act to impose a penalty for not purchasing coverage , and for the intense media scrutiny surrounding the demographics of people enrolling through state exchanges . Adverse selection occurs when people expecting to use the healthcare system enroll in health insurance plans at a far higher rate than healthier people . Somebody has to pay more in premium than they receive in benefits - or the premiums will have to rise to cover the sicker population - which in turn causes more healthy people to opt out - which causes premiums to rise further - which in turn ... .
YES , in the aggregate sense . Perhaps for some individuals or groups their particular situation will allow them to benefit from the changes in rating methods and benefits required by the Affordable Care Act . But for most individuals and groups I am entirely comfortable in predicting higher health insurance costs . First of all , the underlying cost of health care services continues to rise . As these costs rise the cost of insuring these services must rise accordingly , this has been the case throughout my 30 years in the health insurance industry . Secondly , we are beginning to get a picture of what the enrollment composition in the individual health insurance marketplaces is looking like . As predicted by many industry professionals , the enrollment is skewing towards an older and sicker population with the highly desired young and healthy population largely remaining on the sidelines . Just today one of nation 's largest pharmacy management companies reported their preliminary analysis of the prescription utilization of marketplace enrollees vs their pre-health care reform population . Usage of expensive prescription medications for serious chronic health problems is 47 % higher , and this is just based on a couple of months of utilization data ! While some hold out the hope that the people who waited until the last moment to enroll were disproportionately young and healthy , my own experience enrolling people gives little indication that this was the case . So , the table has been set for adverse selection -LRB- more sick than healthy enrollees -RRB- in the health insurance pool , especially for the insurance carriers who elected to participate in the government health insurance marketplaces . This can not help but translate into higher health insurance costs for 2015 and in many areas of the country this will translate into very significant double digit increases in individual and small group health insurance . This has already been broadly hinted at by all the major health insurance carriers , it 's really not a question of `` if '' but just `` how much '' .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Lesson One A Simple Lesson on How the S&P 500 Works -LRB- Since the AP Has No Clue -RRB- Oct. 4 , 2010 4:34 AM ET | 15 comments | About : SPDR S&P 500 Trust ETF -LRB- SPY -RRB- , IVV , VOO , SSO , SH , SDS For More Info contact I came across this disaster of a story from the Associated Press yesterday : `` Apple May Surpass Exxon As Most Valuable Company . '' Interesting - Apple -LRB- AAPL -RRB- is a monster - but I did n't expect the AP -LRB- that 's Associated Press , not to be confused with AAPL -RRB- to attempt to mis-educate their vast audience with this blatantly false nonsense that shows a thorough lack of understanding of how the SPX works : While Apple CEO Steve Jobs will no doubt be happy about his new perch atop the business world , there 's more at stake here than mere bragging rights . As soon as the total value of the company 's shares edges above Exxon 's , Apple will take over the top spot in the Standard and Poor 's 500 , the market index used by most professional money managers . That means that billions of dollars invested in funds that track the index will have to shift their holdings to reflect Apple 's new weighting . Exxon , meanwhile , may see its share price fall from the same effect . That slide could be accelerated by hedge funds and technical traders who make bets based on the rebalancing of major indexes and would be primed to short the shares of Exxon . '' Reminder : The S&P 500 is a market cap weighted index . That means that larger companies have a higher weight in the index . An S&P 500 index fund will own a certain percentage of the outstanding shares of each company . It does n't take a market expert to understand that when Apple 's share price rises , and its market cap rises , its value in your S&P 500 portfolio also rises ! As an S&P indexer , you do n't have to do a thing . Changes in market cap based on share price movement are automatically self adjusting - after all , market cap = share price x shares outstanding . On a quarterly basis , the S&P 500 rebalances its index based on new share issuance and buybacks -LRB- in other words , changes in shares outstanding -RRB- . For example , when Exxon -LRB- XOM -RRB- buys back shares , S&P 500 indexers will need to sell shares of XOM . If XOM does a secondary offering , indexers will need to buy shares of XOM . So if you own one you need to relax it corrects automatic so you need not worry .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
What type of life insurance you get depends on what you want the life insurance for and for how long you want / need the coverage . An independent life insurance broker who represents several companies can help you find the right policy at the right price . Here is overview to get you started : Term is insurance is initially the most inexpensive type of coverage . The premiums rise at the end of each term and the policy has an expiry date . Conversion to permanent insurance is usually permitted before a stated age -LRB- check contract for details -RRB- , Best for short term needs . Whole life is permanent coverage and usually has a guaranteed level premium . The policy 's death benefit could be designed to rise in value , In addition there could be a significant build up of cash value . This type of policy has long term applications in financial , retirement and estate planning . Since the premium is level , it is initially higher than term coverage for the same amount . If cost is a concern a combination of whole life and term can often be an alternative . Universal life can provide permanent insurance coverage . I say can be because it is essentially a whole life policy `` unbundled '' where you control the amount of premium and the investment options . This flexibility is a double edge sword . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Health insurance rates are rising and will be continuing to rise for several reasons ; 1 -RRB- Healthcare costs are rising -LRB- physician services , prescription drugs , inpatient services -RRB- 2 -RRB- An aging population - the Baby Boom generation , the largest demographic segment of our population , have now aged to the point where they are in the prime years of life -LRB- age 40 + -RRB- that health problems begin to become common . 3 -RRB- Increased consumption of health care services in general - across the board , the American population in general is consuming more and a broader array of health care services than past generations . 4 -RRB- New treatments - from expensive new prescription drugs to new forms of technology like robotic surgery we have a wide range of advances in medical science that allow for the treatment of conditions that in the past there were little or no options available . Few of these new advances are cheap . 5 -RRB- New Conditions - from Autisim , to Celiac Sprue Disease to a variety of other conditions , we can diagnose and treat a range of conditions that were n't even recognized as existing in previous decades . 6 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover the Cost of Treating the Uninsured - the cost of providing care for the uninsured who can not pay their own medical bills is shifted over to higher costs for people who are insured . 7 -RRB- Cost Shifting to Cover Government Underpayment for Medicaid and Medicare - since the inception of these government programs in the 1960 's they have never paid the market rate for health care services and in many situations they pay less than the cost of the services these populations consume . This cost difference has also been shifted over to the insured population . 8 -RRB- Government Intervention in the Health Insurance System - with the passage of the Affordable Care Act and the many changes it imposes on health insurance benefits and the financing of health insurance such as doing away with pre-existing condition limitations & exclusions , making policies guaranteed to be issued regardless of health condition , mandating a broad new range of services be covered by all health insurance policies -LRB- for example all policies must cover maternity and pediatric dental and vision services even if you are a 50 year old single male -RRB- , providing subsidies for the purchase of heath insurance up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level and expanding Medicaid eligibility in many states are all factors that will contribute to increased demand for a finite resource . Regardless of one 's political or philosophical views of these changes , basic economics teaches us that higher demand for something for which there is a limited supply leads to higher prices . There are more factors that contribute to the ever increasing cost of health insurance but these are among the main driving forces behind the steady increase in health insurance rates people have been experiencing .
Whole Life Insurance can range in price from very low to very high . It depends on your age and health among other things . We always recommend getting a policy of whole life for a child , to insure their `` insurability '' for the future , at an extremely low cost . As you get a big older , the price rises , but slowly . The younger you are , the better it is to get whole life then , before it continues to rise . With good health and a reasonable age , whole life can be very affordable , especially when you factor in it allows you to take cash out for emergencies or retirement , or to help pay the future premiums . New York Life even offers Custom Whole Life , which allows you to stop paying your premiums completely and keep your life insurance . Gary Lane , Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
The causes of rising health insurance premiums are probably too complex for a short answer . However , the Affordable Care Act mandates coverages that are to be included in the plan , and who can be included in the plan . These additional coverages affect the rate charged . Medical expenses , in general , are rising more quickly than other sectors . These two factors have a profound impact on the rates being charged .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowner 's Insurance Cover Stolen Car Key FOB Replacement ?
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
If you lost your keys , you 're probably out of luck since most insurers do n't pay for replacement keys in that situation . However , if your locks were damaged during a theft or break-in , or the keys were stolen , many homeowner 's policies will pay for their replacement . It 's possible a deductible may not apply since it clearly is in your and the insurance company 's best interest to replace your locks . An experienced broker will shed additional light and information on this topic .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
The short answer is that unless the car is stolen , or parts of the car are stolen , theft of items from a car are not covered . You 'll seek this coverage from your homeowner insurance . If your car is stolen there is a small amount of coverage that comes from the auto after 48 hours . As usually , check with your local agent or insurance company to see how they have written your policy but what I have described in the common policy construction . Auto policies are not designed to coverage your personal property .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
If your asking will renters insurance cover a stolen car the answer is no . Auto insurance comprehensive coverage will cover a stolen car . If you asking if any of your personal items left in the car are covered for theft then the answer is theft from a vehicle is a covered peril . Now it would depend on what the item actually was that is in question and will the stolen item meet the deductible . Also if the auto was damaged during the incident you could potentially have two claims . One one the auto for the damage to the vehicle and on for your personal property that was in the vehicle . Also please note , items permanently mounted to your auto are part of the auto .
Car insurance will pay for a stolen car as long as you have comprehensive coverage . Comprehensive coverage covers the vehicle for damages not resulting from a collision accident . For example , fire , theft , glass breakage , a tree falls on the car , ect . If you car is stolen the insurance company will determined the blue book value and pay out the blue book value less your deductible . Kelly Blue Book is a good site to use to determine the value of your car . If your car is still financed and there is a gap in coverage you may end up stilling owing the finance company . Gap insurance is available to cover this need .
As a general rule , most homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for personal property that is stolen from a car . The stolen property will be subject to your property deductible and depending on the type of property stolen , your policy may have a limit to the coverage amount provided . For example , money , jewelry , electronic devices , and other `` high value '' items are typically limited to a maximum coverage amount of $ 500 - $ 1,000 unless your policy includes increased limits through an endorsement . As a side note , your auto policy may also include a small limit of coverage for property stolen from the vehicle .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
When your car is damaged it is covered if you have physical damage coverages . Comprehensive covers claims that come from damage other than collision . The car will be repaired minus the deductible . The contents stolen from the car , however , are not covered by the auto policy . For the items in the car to be covered they must be covered by a homeowners or renters policy .
If you own your house you need a homeowners policy because Renters insurance does not cover the dwelling . Part of your homeowners policy is personal property coverage which covers your personal belongings any where in the world . Coverage is limited to 10 % of your personal property limit if a claim occurs away from your home . For example , you are traveling on vacation and your luggage is stolen . Your house is insured for $ 500,000 and you have $ 350,000 personal property coverage . You will have coverage up to $ 35,000 for your stolen luggage .
No , if your car is broken into and personal items stolen from it , there is no coverage for those items . Your car policy , so long as you have Comprehensive Physical Damage coverage , will take care of the damage caused to your car in the act of this crime . You will need to file a police report of course . Next turn to your Homeowners ' , Condo Unit Owners ' or Renters ' Insurance policy for coverage for your stolen belongings .
Theft is a covered peril under most renters policies . Recovery is limited to the value of the item minus the deductible . Some policies will allow settlement based upon replacement cost once you actually replace the stolen item . If the property stolen was not in the residence the amount of recovery is normally limited to a percentage of the coverage for personal property .
If you car is stolen and not recovered then the insurance company , providing you have comprehensive coverage , will determine the actual cash value of your vehicle and then write you a check for the stolen vehicle . You will have to relinquish the title over to the insurance company . If you had a loan on the vehicle the loan will be paid off first and you will receive what ever is left . If you do not have comprehensive coverage then you have no coverage for the loss . If you car is recovered then it will be determined if the car is repairable or a total loss depending on the condition the car is found in . Most insurance companies will wait 30 days to see if the car is recovered or not then just call it a loss at that point if the car is not recovered .
Providing you carry comprehensive coverage on your auto policy which covers theft your insurance would still cover the theft of your vehicle if you left your keys in the car . Always make sure to file a police report immediately if your vehicle is stolen and then contact your insurance company to file a claim .
Like Edward has already answered , car break-ins are covered if you have the vehicle insured with Comprehensive -LRB- also called `` Other Than Collision '' coverage . Keep in mind thought , if anything is stolen - typically only those things permanently attached to the vehicle are covered under the auto policy . If a purse , laptop or other personal property not attached to the vehicle is stolen - most carriers cover these things under a homeowners or rental policy and are subject to that policies deductible and limits . So if your care gets broken into , you could be facing two claims and two deductibles unfortunately . Check with your local independent agent to verify your policy 's specific language .
Great question ! The answer depends upon a couple of things - your policies coverage , and where the laptop was when it was stolen . If it was taken from your apartment , then it generally will be . If it was in your car , parked in the apartment parking lot , there 's a good chance that you can get it replaced . If it was stolen at school , or you left it on a bus somewhere , that might be a whole lot harder to get back . I 'd advise you to contact your agent and tell them the story , and see what exactly your policy covers . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
Great question ! You do not need renters insurance if you have a great amount of cash hidden away in a Swiss bank account , or somewhere similar . If your belongings are stolen or damaged somehow , you can just dip into that account and buy all new stuff to replace what was stolen or lost . If that is not you , then maybe renters insurance is a good idea . Most of us do not have the money to replace our things in the event of a fire , or burglary , and that is the purpose for the insurance . It can be a real blessing in the event of some unexpected hardship.If you would like some more information on what you should look for in the policy , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Long Does Renters Insurance Take To Pay Out ?
Most claims are paid within a few hours to a few days with many carriers . There are many factors that will decide how long a claim takes to process . A few of those factors are : the amount of the claim , the type of claim , the availability of police reports or other supporting documents , just to name a few . If you feel a claim is taking longer than it should to be processed contact your local agent and express your concern so that they can help you gain some insight as to when the claim is expected to achieve completion .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Can you take out a life insurance policy on your grandmother ? That question , like most on this website , can not be answered with a straight yes or no . If your grandmother lives with you and you share in her income and expenses , you should be able to take out a policy of at least $ 100,000 on your grandmother . If you are buying a policy so that you can pay for her funeral , you should be able to take out at least $ 15,000 on her . If neither of those are the case , you may not be allowed to take out a policy on your grandmother . It depends on the circumstances , the company , and the type of policy you are buying . Insurance fraud often involves people taking out life insurance on older persons who have a short life expectancy , by younger people who have no financial interest in the lives of the Insured . Life insurance companies each strive to prevent that type of fraud in their own way , and thus you will find different regulations involving whether or not a grandchild can take out a policy on a grandparent . Suffice it to say that if the cause is legitimate , it is usually OK to take a life insurance policy out on a grandmother .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! Insurance companies will set a commencement date far enough ahead into the future to show you an impressive number for your return , and that is the date by which you must have started taking your withdrawals . The truth is that you can take money out at any time , BUT - there are serious consequences if you are n't careful . An annuity is not a suitable product for someone who has cash flow issues , and might need the money sooner than later . I 'd advise you to look at your policy , and look for these things : Do I have a free withdrawal amount , if so , how much and when can I start taking it ? How long is the surrender period , and what are the charges ? -LRB- If the surrender period is ten years , that means every year during that period , whatever you withdraw will be subject to that fee , among likely others , as well as a federal penalty of 10 % if you are younger than 591/2 -RRB- The last thing to look at is what triggers if you pull money out . Does it start , or lock in a payment cycle for you ? Again , that could be disastrous if you are n't very careful . Let the money ride in there as long as you can afford to , -LRB- at least until you are 60 -RRB- and then start taking your withdrawals . Depending on how your annuity is structured , you may be required to start your rmd 's at the age of 701/2 . If you 'd like help with your specifics , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
Renters insurance is typically one of the lowest cost insurances out there . Most renter will pay from $ 7/mo or up . The best thing to do is to have your auto and renters insurance with the same company . Most companies will offer you a discount by having both policies with them and in some cases the discount makes the renters insurance nearly free . Call your local agent today to find out what is available in your area and how affordable the coverage is .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Buy Auto Insurance Without Owning A Car ?
It would be different for every state . In Michigan we have something called Non-Owner coverage . This would be the coverage you would need if you did not own a vehicle and it covers your liability when you 're driving someone else 's vehicle . However , the vehicle that you are driving would still need to have current registration and current insurance on it by the owner of the vehicle for your non-owner coverage to be valid .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Not quite sure what you mean . Do you mean needing auto insurance for some time until you buy a car , or needing auto insurance right before you buy a car and drive off the lot ? If you 're about to buy a car , all you need is the VIN # of the vehicle before binding a policy . If you mean needing insurance now without owning a car , you will need either a named operator policy or a broad form named driver policy , depending on the state you live in .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
Coverage follows the car . Example 1 : If you were given a car -LRB- loaned -RRB- and the car has no insurance , you can buy insurance on the car and your insurance will be primary . Another option , someone helped you to buy a car . For example your credit score is n't good enough to finance , so a friend of yours signed under your loan as a primary payor . You can get insurance under your name and even list your friend on the policy as a loss payee . In this case , we always suggest you get a loan gap coverage : the difference between the car 's actual cash value and the amount still owned on it . Example 2 : The car you are loaned has insurance . You can buy a policy under your name , list the car on that policy and in case of the accident , your policy will become a secondary or excess . Once the limits of the primary car insurance are exhausted , your coverage would kick in and hopefully pay for the rest . I specifically used the word hopefully , because each accident is unique and it 's hard to interpret the coverage without the actual claim scenario . And even with a given claim scenario , sometimes there are 2 possible outcomes of a claim .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Rental car insurance is available from rental car agencies . If you own an insured car the insurance from that car extends to a rental car which means that purchasing the coverage from the rental agency is not necessary . If you do not own a car , it is possible to purchase non-owned auto insurance which would eliminate the requirement for buying liability insurance from the rental agency . You would still need physical damage coverage .
A person can own as many Life Insurance policies as they desire if they qualify for the coverage and can pay for them . The biggest problem is that without proper counseling the policy may not fit the need that the person was purchasing the policy for . Many policies are put on the market to meet specific needs and because of the public knowledge a person may buy a policy that they thought meant one type of coverage when in actuality it was completely different coverage . Over my lifetime I have worked with persons who would buy term policies when in their mind they had mixed them up with policies which are paid up early , ie , ten pay life , etc. . I have met more than one individual who through the years had bought 10 year term thinking it was like ten pay life and that it would be paid up in ten years . I want to stress here that buying a Life Insurance policy without understanding all of its reasons for existence is like buying any auto with four wheels without knowing anything further . I would also like to point out that most Life Insurance policies have what is called a `` policy fee '' that is attached to the premium of the policy . What this means is that the company is charging fifty to sixty dollars per year for the administration of that policy and there is no coverage on that amount of the premium . I have had people want several smaller policies to avoid taking a medical . This also can be a mistake since most companies have discounts on the larger amounts of Life Insurance on an individual . In today 's life you can find an individual who has knowledge in all fields of finance . If that person is living up to the pledges made to become an agent they will educate the client and help them purchase the proper Life Insurance and investments without sales pressure . A good agent builds clients for a lifetime ! Allen D. `` Al '' Mitchell , Ph.D. , CLU , FLMI Author `` The Prophets Dollar '' second edition .
How much auto insurance is enough ? I once heard a story from a gentleman that may answer your question . He told me about an accident he had when he was younger . At the time of the accident he did n't own much and had very little in savings , so he was taking a chance by owning and driving a car without insurance . He figured sice he did n't own much and since the car was an old oil burner , he did n't need it . Then one day he was in a hurry and was trying to beat a yellow traffic light before it changed to red , when he clipped the front end of another car coming through the intersection in front of him . He said that when he came to , he checked himself out , then searched for the other driver . When he found that both he and the other driver were uninjured , he was thrilled . As he looked around more closely he found himself inside a building specifically a liquor store and was right in the middle of the Scotch aisle . When the dust settled the other driver had claimed only $ 15,000 to replace his car ... . but the store owner sued him for over $ 500,000 in damages to his store and contents . The judge awarded a total of $ 515,000 in a damage award and the old gentleman told me he was still working to pay off the judgement now 10 years later . The answer to your question is buy as much coverage as you can afford . Do n't be fooled by some auto insurace brokers when they try to sell you the state minimums as you could be paying for that cheap policy in the years to come !
Let me add one other use for Non Owned liability coverage . You work in an occupation where the owner of the business is also the owner of the vehicle you use on a regular basis . Non owned vehicle coverage can play an important role in protecting you . Keep in mind that your employer buys coverage to protect his/her interest not yours . If you own an auto , and are faced with an employer providing basic coverage then it is called Extended Non Owned Liability coverage . If you do not own any car then it is referred to as Non Owned Liability Coverage -LRB- not Extended at that point -RRB- Non owned coverage can be a very valuable way of protecting you , your family or guest passengers in your car . Most large employers are not concerned with Uninsured Motorist or Underinsured Motorist Coverage . But you should be . In about 14 % of all wrecks the adverse driver who causes the wreck will have no insurance . so now you need the protection of uninsured and under insured motorist coverage which is not something your employer worries about -LRB- its your life not his or hers -RRB- so , be sure you buy a non owned liability policy in these circumstances and match the UM and UIM limits with your liability limit of coverage
I really do n't know the answer to this question , as I believe that every person who owns and drives a car needs auto insurance . Just think for a moment , if you did n't own auto insurance and you driving a car down a city street , when the car in front of you stops suddenly , you jerk your steering wheel to the side and manage to miss the car in front of you . You open your eyes and look at yourself and see that the airbags protected you and you were not injured ... but you find that you ran head long into the corner liquor store and end up in the middle of the scotch section , having destroyed most of the owners inventory . How would you pay for that ? Savings retirement , income will all be gone , as well as maybe your house and any other property you might own , not to mention your car is toast . This is the reason you need auto insurance , as it protects your finances now and in the future
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
When Can I Use My Long Term Care Insurance ?
Once your long term care insurance is in effect , the definition of activities of daily living -LRB- ADL -RRB- provide the guidance for reviewing the policy provisions that trigger a claim . Some long term care insurance companies allow two out of six ADLs to initiate a legitimate claim and distribute the benefits of the policy .
You can use your long term care insurance when you have qualify via LTC triggers . In qualified plans , you must be unable to perform two or more ADL 's without substantial or standby supervision , depending on the wording of the policy , or you must need substantial supervision due to a cognitive impairment . However , unlike unqualified plans , you must have evidence that you will need the care for at least 90 days , and you must use your benefits under the parameters of a written care plan prepared by a licensed professional . Non-qualified plans do not have the 90 day requirement , do not require substantial supervision for cognitive impairment , and add the ADL of ambulating to the list , thereby making it easier to qualify . Plans may also include the trigger of medical necessity , meaning that benefits can be collected if skilled nursing care is ordered by a physician . However , these plans do not have the tax advantages of qualified plans .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For An Eye Exam ?
This is a good question . Medicare typically does not cover routine eye exams unless there is an issue such as cataracts . Keep in mind that Medicare advantage plans , Part C normally will provide you with vision coverage and stand alone dental/vision plans are available in some states .
Some things associated with vision are covered under Medicare and some are not . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . Even if you start out taking an routine eye exam and it is determined during the exam that you have eye conditions qualifying for Medicare funded treatment , only subsequent exams for those conditions will be covered . Medicare does cover glaucoma testing for those at risk for glaucoma due to certain conditions or family history . It will cover medically prescribed exams , testing , and treatments for eye conditions that result from illness or injury . Medicare does not cover eyeglasses . It will cover an IOL following a cataract surgery and eyeglass as a prosthesis during cataract surgery recovery .
Medicare covers testing for eye conditions if suspected -LRB- not as part of a routine exam -RRB- , treatment for eye conditions that are a result of illness or injury , intraocular lenses following cataract surgery , one pair of glasses after cataract surgery , glaucoma screening for those with risk factors , and eye prosthesis for absent or shrinking eye . For Medicare covered eye surgery stipulations , see WEBSITELINK . Medicare does not normally cover routine eye exams , testing or eyeglasses .
Medicare will cover anything wrong with your eyes medically -LRB- cataracts , glaucoma , macular degeneration , etc -RRB- . When you have your eyes examined Medicare does not cover the part of the exam called refraction to see if your prescription needs to be changed . My eye doctor charges $ 35 for refraction . Most of your eye exam will be covered by Medicare Part B , 80 % then the other 20 % if you have a Medicare Supplement . Medicare does not cover eyeglasses unless you are getting a new prescription as a result of cataract surgery .
Routine eye exams are not a covered expense under Medicare . Neither are corrective lenses -LRB- eye glasses , contact lens , etc. -RRB- in most situations . If you have an eye disease , such as glaucoma or cataracts , a portion of your eye exam may be covered under Medicare Part B. Your eye care professional can advise .
Medigap plans do not provide coverage for routine eye exams and eye glasses . In short , you will need to secure coverage under a separate vision insurance plan to to cover routine services . Medicare Part B can provide coverage for some preventive and diagnostic eye exams for people at high-risk of certain conditions -LRB- e.g. diagnosing retinopathy in diabetics or mascular degeneration for age-related conditions -RRB- . In combination with a Medigap plan , these exams can be covered at 100 % -LRB- Medicare Part B - 80 % , Medigap - the remaining 20 % -RRB- . You can check out the medicare.gov website for more specific information regarding condition/risk requirements for Medicare to pay benefits .
Medigap plans do not provide coverage for routine eye exams and eye glasses . In short , you will need to secure coverage under a separate vision insurance plan to to cover routine services . Medicare Part B can provide coverage for some preventive and diagnostic eye exams for people at high-risk of certain conditions -LRB- e.g. diagnosing retinopathy in diabetics or mascular degeneration for age-related conditions -RRB- . In combination with a Medigap plan , these exams can be covered at 100 % -LRB- Medicare Part B - 80 % , Medigap - the remaining 20 % -RRB- . You can check out the medicare.gov website for more specific information regarding condition/risk requirements for Medicare to pay benefits . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medigap plan needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare Part A or Part B . If you are an inpatient in a hospital , and have an illness or injury to your eye , Part A would cover that exam . If you are treated as an outpatient in the ER , clinic or doctor 's office for illness or injury to your eye , Part B will cover at least a portion of the exam .
Medicare Part B does not pay for routine eye exams -LRB- eye refractions -RRB- for the purpose of testing eyesight and prescribing eyeglasses . Medicare does pay for eye exams in some situations . 1 -RRB- An annual test for diabetic retinopathy is covered annually for all those who have diabetes . 2 -RRB- Glaucoma tests are covered once every 12 months for those who are at high risk for glaucoma . High risk patients include those who are diabetic , have a family history of glaucoma , are African-American and over age 50 , or are Hispanic and over age 65 . 3 -RRB- Some people with Age-Related Macular Degeneration are covered for various tests .
Medicare does n't cover routine eye examinations and glasses . Part B can provide coverage for some preventive and diagnostic eye exams for people at high risk of certain conditions -LRB- e.g. diagnosing retinopathy in diabetics or mascular degeneration for age-related conditions -RRB- . You can check out the medicare.gov website for more specific information regarding condition/risk requirements for Medicare to pay benefits . If you 're looking for coverage for routine eye exams , glasses , contacts , etc. , you would need to secure a vision insurance plan . Please feel free to contact me for assistance or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare does n't cover routine eye examinations . Part B can provide coverage for some preventive and diagnostic eye exams for people at high risk of certain conditions -LRB- e.g. diagnosing retinopathy in diabetics or mascular degeneration for age-related conditions -RRB- . You can check out the medicare.gov website for more specific information regarding condition/risk requirements for Medicare to pay benefits . If you 're looking for coverage for routine eye exams , glasses , contacts , etc. , you would need to secure a vision insurance plan . Please feel free to contact me for assistance or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare generally does not cover dental or vision . However , there are certain conditions when Medicare may provide some coverage - this is generally when it 's an integral part of a covered procedure . For dental , Medicare may provide some coverage when it 's an integral part of another procedure , such as procedures conducted during a hospital visit , covered under Part A. Routine checkups , cleanings , fillings , etc. are not covered by Medicare . For vision , Medicare will cover some preventive and diagnostic eye exams such as for glaucoma or macular degeneration . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . You can purchase a separate dental and/or vision insurance plan through an insurance agent/broker .
Excellent question and one about which there is much confusion these days . As a general rule , most health insurance policies do not cover routine eye exams -LRB- this would be different from an eye exam required to diagnose and/or treat a medical condition like Macular Degeneration -RRB- . Many employers and a growing number of individuals insure their vision care needs through separate Vision Insurance policies that do cover eye exams , lenses , frames , contact lenses , etc. . Where things get more confusing , and sometimes frustrating for the consumer , is in understanding some of the new benefits mandated by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . One of these mandatory benefits is that coverage for pediatric vision and dental be included in health insurance policies sold on or after January 1 , 2014 . So , you may be paying for a vision benefit that only your children can use and if you have no children you are paying for a benefit you , as an adult , can not use . The consumer should not assume that even if their new ObamaCare compliant policy is in place that this will translate into effective coverage for your dependent children . Each insurance carrier has designed their benefit plans differently in regard to the vision & dental requirements . Some make it an upfront benefit similar to vision insurance coverage you may have seen in the past while others require that the major medical plan 's deductible be met before such services would be reimbursed . So , if you have a Bronze plan with a $ 6000 deductible you technically have some vision coverage for dependent children but no effective coverage until you have met the $ 6000 deductible first . Buyer beware is my advice and the consumer should carefully research this benefit area in the various health insurance options you might be considering . This is another example of where an experienced and knowledgeable health insurance broker can be invaluable in helping you select the health insurance plan best suited to your needs and budget .
Medicare does not cover a routine eye exam just to check to see if your prescription has changed -LRB- refraction exam -RRB- . Medicare does not cover new glasses unless you have been prescribed new glasses after cataract surgery . Medicare will cover anything medically wrong with your eyes such as cataracts , glaucoma , macular degenerative disease , etc. . Medicare does not cover dental unless your teeth have been injured as a result of an accident .
Medicare is not designed to cover routine eye exams or corrective lenses . You may want to consider a supplemental policy which may make payments for exams and provide discounts for glasses , contact lenses , etc. . Eye exams and certain corrective intraocular lenses may be covered if needed to correct an underlying medical condition such as glaucoma , and cataracts .
Medicare Part B can provide coverage for some preventive and diagnostic eye exams for people at high-risk of certain conditions -LRB- e.g. diagnosing retinopathy in diabetics or mascular degeneration for age-related conditions -RRB- . However , Medicare does not cover routine eye exams for glasses or contacts . You can check out the medicare.gov website for more specific information regarding condition/risk requirements for Medicare to pay benefits . You will need to secure coverage under a separate vision insurance plan to receive benefits for glasses , contacts , and other routine services .
Routine vision eye exams are not covered by Medicare . This would be covered under a separate vision insurance plan or you would pay out of pocket . If a vision exam is deemed medically necessary by your doctor , Medicare may cover it . An example of when this might happen is if someone is diabetic and the doctor is concerned about the possibility of retinopathy , he/she may order a vision exam . In that type of instance , Medicare would cover the exam . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare does n't cover routine examinations . Part B can provide coverage for some preventive and diagnostic eye exams for people at high risk of certain conditions -LRB- e.g. diagnosing retinopathy in diabetics or mascular degeneration for age-related conditions -RRB- . You can check out the medicare.gov website for more specific information regarding condition/risk requirements for Medicare to pay benefits . If you 're looking for coverage for routine eye exams , glasses , contacts , etc. , you would need to secure a vision insurance plan . Please feel free to contact me for assistance or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare will cover disease of the eye such as cataracts or glaucoma . It does not cover general eye exams or eye wear . It will pay for prescription glasses after cataract surgery or some other types of surgery that is deemed medically necessary . Your Ophthalmologist will generally know if a procedure will be covered or not .
Medicare does not cover periodic eye exams for vision testing and does not cover eyeglasses , in most cases . Medicare will pay for one pair of eyeglasses following cataract surgery in which an introcular lens was implanted . Medicare will also pay for treatment or surgery by a medical doctor for eye disease .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Should Buy Long Term Care Insurance ?
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
You should buy Long Term Care Insurance if you want the peace of mind that knowing that your family will not have to worry about you if you need assistance in taking care of yourself in your later years . You should buy Long Term Care Insurance if you want the freedom to choose your own caregivers and residence if you can no longer live on your own , rather than have Medicaid determine where you will live . You should buy Long Term Care Insurance if you want your hard earned savings to go to your inheritance rather than to the nursing home . Should everyone buy Long Term Care Insurance ? No . But there are some very good reasons for many people to buy Long Term Care Insurance .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
People who have very few assets and/or income should probably not get long term care insurance . If there are immediate needs that will go unmet because you are concerned about a possible long term care stay in the future , then the cost of long term care insurance may not be worth it . Also , if you may perhaps go on Medicaid in the future , even without needing long term care services , you should not purchase long term care insurance , in most situations .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product that is underwritten on the basis on medical and behavioral information . Medical information is based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Behavioral information is based on motor vehicle records , vocational and recreational hazards . Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Homeowners Insurance Drop Me ?
Your insurance policy has a specific term . The company is not obligated to renew the policy for another term . Most do . The company can cancel the policy before the end of the term if they suspect fraud or determine that there is an unsafe condition present . The company might conduct an inspection that uncovers conditions that require repair to avoid cancellation .
Unfortunately , the homeowners insurance company has the `` right '' non-renew your coverage each year they renew the policy . It depends on your specific state if they can drop you mid-policy or not . They normally ca n't drop you mid-policy unless they discover a material misrepresentation by you . They can drop you for non-payment , but for a claim they can only non-renew your policy . If you have additional questions please let me know .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Great question ! There would be a couple of immediate results . The first is that you would no longer have the benefit of insurance to help pay for costs should you become sick or injured . Those costs can be devastating to your financial stability . The second is that under the Affordable Care Act , there are penalties for not having insurance , that are leveled when you file your taxes for this year . The health insurance companies limit the ability to enroll in their programs , and many workplace plans will not drop you until the open enrollment period unless you meet specified conditions.Without knowing the reason that you are considering dropping your coverage , I would ask that you would have a plan in place before you actually do drop your coverage . If I can provide more information , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
The easy answer to drop your term life insurance is when you goal for that plan is met . For example , if you purchased the plan to cover a 30 year mortgage and paid it off early and have no further need for the protection you should drop it . If the term is met and the rates increased drastically you may want to drop it and apply for another policy if your health is still good . Another scenario may be retirement and the nest egg is fully funded with no unforeseen circumstances , it could be time to drop it or convert it to permanent life insurance or paid up life insurance if the need for a death benefit still exists .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
A health insurance company can only drop you under certain circumstances such as failure to pay your premium -LRB- and the grace period has expired -RRB- or you intentionally falsified information on your application for the coverage . They can not drop you when you have a large claim , if they feel like it , or anything of that nature . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let me count the ways 1 . When you want to be sure your benefit will be paid out . People tend to keep permanent insurance and drop term . If you drop the policy , no one will collect the money you paid for ! 2 . When you want a premium guarantee for life . Term will , as you know , guarantee the premium for a fixed period only . 3 . When you want cash accumulation at a guaranteed interest rate that is typically higher than any other guarantee-oriented product . What other product is a better fit for the conservative portion of your financial portfolio ?
Can you drop your husband from your health insurance ? Well the answer may vary by state . You may be able to drop your husband , but he will have to agree in writing for it to be done . The reason for this is when a couple divorces a spouse sometimes drops the others coverage without their knowledge . Sort of like emptying the bank account .
Several things can get you dropped from your auto insurance policy . One could be not making your payments which could result in policy termination . However assuming you make your payment on time the main reason is increased risk . A poor driving record is usually the primary contributor of your policy being non renewed . DUI 's andwrecklessdriving are top of the list or a combination of multiple accidents and moving violations will do it . You wo n't be cancelled for one or sometimes even two accidents but have that third one and in most cases you may be dropped . There are some carriers that do have a no drop promise so something to consider .
You employer may drop your health insurance . However , there are many underwater stones involved with this executive decision . For example , the employer can not drop the coverage for you only , except when you , for example moved from Full Time to Part Time and in order to be eligible for benefits you must work full time . Or may be you were moved from employee status to 1099 ? If you 've learned that your employer dropped your health insurance , but other employees of the company still receive this benefit - contact a lawyer . This could be a basis for a lawsuit against your employer .
If you have been automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and B , and are still receiving group health benefits elsewhere , you can drop your Medicare Part B by following the instructions that came in your Medicare packet . There is no penalty to sign up later , in that situation . If you have been on Part B and are dropping it for some reason , be sure to call Social Security at 800-772-1213 before dropping it so that you have a thorough understanding of all the implications of that decision .
Dropping collision on your car depends on how much you wish to self insure . As long as you do not have a loan you can drop collision anytime . However one of the more common times to consider dropping collision is if your vehicle is worth $ 3500.00 or less . The reason for this thinking is this is the amount uninsured motorist property damage would pick up in the event you are hit by someone with no insurance . Of course your still on your own if you cause the accident or if your involved in a hit and run type situation where you do n't know who caused the accident . You may want to look at what you actually are paying for collision coverage and what the vehicle is worth in a total loss since this is all your going to get .
That is a great question ! But to answer it best for you , I 'd really need to know more about you , and what you want the policy to do for you . As a general rule of thumb , if it is to cover a certain debt , like a mortgage or college loan debt , then that is your amount ; if it is to replace your income , then the current wisdom suggests a minimum of 5 times your current salary ; if it is to cover your final expenses , -LRB- funeral costs -RRB- then you will need between $ 10-15 ,000 , depending upon whether you are looking at cremation or a modest funeral . I 'd be happy to help you with your specifics , if you 'd like to inbox me . Please hit the `` contact me '' link , and drop me a line . Thanks for asking !
The single best thing you can do is shop around with other auto insurance companies . Each company is unique in that they have their own appetite for what they like and do n't like . You may fit right into some company 's `` sweet spot '' . But you will never know which companies can beat your current rates . As far as lowering premium on an active policy , you have to be careful . Normally when drivers lower their coverages or cut them out altogether , they tend to make cuts in the wrong areas . It 's important to understand the difference between a controlled risk and an uncontrolled risk . A controlled risk is one where by lowering or dropping coverage , you know the exact dollar amount of the extra risk you are taking on . This includes raising your deductibles on comprehensive and collision coverage -LRB- or dropping it altogether -RRB- , dropping additional coverage such as rental and roadside assistance/towing . Stay away from lowering uncontrolled risks ! Namely liability coverage and uninsured motorist bodily injury coverage . This is where people get burned ! Keep both of these as high as you can afford them .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Best Life Insurance Policy For Me ?
Most people find that they purchase multiple life insurance policies during their lifetime . Having the appropriate coverage at the time of death is a critical matter that requires the counsel of a trusted life insurance agent . The type of policy that the agent will recommend will vary depending on how long the funds will be required . Some insurance will be needed for your entire life . Life insurance exists to help those you love through a very difficult time . Selecting policies , limits and features requires the assistance of a knowledgeable agent .
The best Life Insurance is the Insurance in force when you die . That being said , it all depends on your individual situation . There is no one best plan . You have to consider a number of factors such as age , income , debts , family situation , and your personal goals . A good independent life insurance agent can help you find the best plan for you .
Interestingly enough , I am often asked the question , what is the best life insurance ? There is however , no overall best type that provides all solutions . What is best for you depends on your circumstances and what you want to accomplish . Universal life because of the flexibility is considered by many to be the `` best '' . Whole life and term products could also be the `` best '' , again depending on the circumstances and what you wanted to accomplish . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Video Transcript : Next question is , `` What are the best whole life companies ? '' Well , I have to divide that into a couple of sections . One is , what are the best whole life companies for indemnification ? And what are the best whole life companies if you 're using this for supplemental income ? There are several great carriers out there that are really good dividend paying whole life contracts . If you 're using it for indemnification , you want to look at the most benevolent underwriter , because that 's the game that has to be played in permanent whole life , because you 're going to be paying this premium for the rest of your life . So , I want to find out from an indemnification or protection point of view , who gives me the best number because of my health consideration ? The secondary part is , if I 'm using whole life for an actual income play , I want to be able to use whole life and a contract that actually is going to give me more rate of return . And that 's how I look at it ; is it income , or is it indemnification ?
Some questions you might ask when considering life insurance are : 1 -RRB- What is the rating of this company ? 2 -RRB- Are the rates guaranteed not to go up ? 3 -RRB- Does this policy have cash value ? If so , please show me an illustration . 4 -RRB- Will you be working with me if I need any assistance with my policy in the future ? 5 -RRB- What happens when the terms ends ? -LRB- if buying Term insurance -RRB- 6 -RRB- What riders are available for this policy ? 7 -RRB- How do I borrow from this policy ? -LRB- if buying Whole or Universal Life -RRB- 8 -RRB- What policy has the best rates for my health ? 9 -RRB- May I also get coverage for my spouse ? 10 -RRB- What if I want to drop this policy in the future ? There are many other questions you could ask , but these are some common ones that people ask me . This assumes you know how much coverage you need , and what type . Otherwise , those are also questions you will want to discuss with your agent .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
Ratings are not as relevant as they once used to be . What is important , is how the policies you are looking to buy perform over time . And the best performing are n't always the best policies . If you can find an agent who really understands what it is he or she does , to me that is the most important aspect . They can guide you into finding whatever it is you seek . These days there are just too many choices for the average consumer to sort through . As agents it can be a daunting experience to match the right company/policy to the client . After 20 years , I speak from the heart . I love what I do , and I love to help the public figure things out . That is what matters most to me . Find an agent who cares and you have a winner .
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
I believe family floater health insurance refers to a type of program available in India and not the United States . I 'm therefore not able to provide much help with advice for that type of specific program . However , when speaking in generalities regarding -LRB- U.S. -RRB- health insurance , what 's best for you may not be what 's best for someone else - meaning that no one plan is the `` best '' plan you can get . You 've got to look at what the pricing is in addition to what benefits you get under the plan and the networks they follow -LRB- if applicable -RRB- . I would suggest identifying what are the needs and goals you want met most with your coverage . Then , you should review plans that meet that criteria and go from there when you start looking at pricing . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
What does life insurance provide ? For me , piece of mind and control . The piece of mind comes from the fact that I have thought about my family and had taken steps to provide for them if for any reason I pass away . The control part comes from the type of life insurance I chose to own . I own whole life . The insurance company ca n't raise the premium on me , ca n't do anything to the policy without my consent and the policy ca n't go backwards in cash values . That 's what life insurance provides me . It may be something entirely different for someone else .
Medicare Part D plans change , what 's best for you this year may brake your piggy bank the next . Every year from October 15 to December 7 is the time when you need to re-evaluate your prescription coverage and the best way to do that is by going to the Medicare Web site WEBSITELINK and click on the green button `` Find health & drug plans '' . Every insurance company that is going to offer a Part D plan for the following year has to submit their formulary , what drugs they are going to cover and the cost to Medicare . The Medicare site allows consumers to enter all of their drugs , it will search and compare all of the insurance companies and it will show you which plan give you the best value . This is something that you should do every year to make sure that you always will have the best coverage . If you do n't feel comfortable doing this or if you do n't have computer access then check with a good broker that represent multiple companies and they will do that for you for free . This process generally takes me about 10 to 15 minutes for my clients . If you need more help please feel free to contact me .
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Video Transcript : What is the best life insurance for doctors ? There 's no such as thing one carrier that 's really the best for physicians . They may have an underwriting program that 's a little bit more benevolent for wealthy clients , and generally , doctors are wealthy clients . They may be a little bit more benevolent in medical underwriting ; they may be a little bit more benevolent in giving more death benefit amounts for insurance justification purposes . For one carrier to say that they are better at physician underwriting than another , I 'm not really sure that that 's true . What I 'm looking at always is , ` Who has the best deal and price tag based on my medical condition ? ' then I can fit that into what I 'm presenting to a physician and using brokerage companies that will give me several carriers on a spreadsheet . I 'll be able to determine which is the best contract for that physician .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Switch Auto Insurance In The Middle Of A Policy ?
Auto insurance is an at will product . This means that you can change carriers at any point that you wish . You will have to pay your premium to the carrier you are signing with and then inform your current carrier to cancel your policy effective the start date of the new policy . Your current carrier should refund any unused portion of the premium that you already paid for the current term .
You absolutely can cancel an auto policy mid-term . Then that auto insurance company must give you back any `` unearned '' premium , for which they are not entitled to . They can only keep money that they have `` earned '' while insuring you and your auto . Do n't let anyone tell you anything differently than that .
Insurance companies do n't force anyone to keep a policy in force regardless if it is auto , home , life , disability , long term care , health , business , workers ' compensation , etc. . However , type of policy and state where you are located can make a difference in how the cancellation is calculated . With an auto policy , you would want to contact the company or your insurance professional to determine if the cancellation is pro-rated or short-rated . Pro-rated means the company will only charge you premium for the days used . A short-rated calculation provides for a penalty . This information is also included in every policy contract .
Yes . You can switch auto -LRB- home , renters commercial or most any other -RRB- insurance at anytime . Some companies may charge an early termination fee , but must do not . You should receive all of your unused premium back . Your insurance policy or your agent or broker should have information on early termination fees .
You can switch your auto insurance in the middle of a policy period . But unless your savings is enough to offset ant early cancellation penalty , you may want to wait for the renewal . To determine if it is wise to cancel early , a licensed and registered broker can help you determine the viability of changing and whether it makes prudent financial sense .
You can switch auto insurance in the middle of your term . That is , if you have a 6 or 12 month policy where the rate is guaranteed during that time , you can change companies . If you paid ahead , you may receive a short-rated refund , depending on the timing and carrier . If you shop a top auto insurance website , you will be able to view multiple quotes from the most reputable companies and perhaps save money . An experienced broker can do the shopping for you so you do the saving . What a great concept !
You can switch your auto policy at any time . The most popular motivation to switch insurance carriers is price . People are looking for the best price for there insurance all the time . Other reasons to switch would be a new car purchase or moving to a new state . Switching carriers is easy and there are many to choose from . Shopping your auto insurance around is a great idea to compare prices . Using and agent can help you find insurance carriers that you normally would not have access to but going direct to and insurer online is also beneficial cutting out a middle man and getting quotes instantly . Be sure to check the term dates , is it six months or a year policy ? This can effect the way you compare the premiums . You will want to match your old coverage with your new quotes . Make sure the coverages are the same or similar this can prevent a coverage gap where you thought you had coverage . If you new vehicle is n't so new any more you may want to lower the amount of coverage on a particular vehicle . This can help lower your premium on the new policy or you can amend you current one . So while you can switch you insurer at any time do your research and make sure that it works in your favor .
You can switch auto insurance in the middle of your term . That is , if you have a 6 or 12 month policy where the rate is guaranteed during that time , you can change companies . If you paid ahead , you may receive a short-rated refund , depending on the timing and carrier . If you shop a top auto insurance website , you will be able to view multiple quotes from the most reputable companies and perhaps save money . An experienced broker can do the shopping for you so you do the saving . What a great concept !
Plan F offers the most comprehensive coverage of the new standardized plans . Plan G offers the best over value when compared to Plan F. Plan N or High Deductible plan F will offer the lowest over all premium , but with that you may take on additional out of pocket risk . Plan selection can also be influenced by the time of year you are switching . Switch to Plan G at or soon after the beginning of the year . If you are in the middle of the year and have plan F , it may be better to stay with Plan F. Each situation is different and that 's why it 's important to work with a broker .
You may switch auto insurance carriers in the middle of a policy term . In most cases the premiums are pro-rated back to you but I would always double check with the carrier . In some cases , especiallyin the non-standard market carriers will short rate the policy meaning there is a certain amount of premium earned to the company they will hold back . Call your local agent to discuss .
You can switch your auto insurance in the middle of a policy period . But unless your savings is enough to offset ant early cancellation penalty , you may want to wait for the renewal . To determine if it is wise to cancel early , a licensed and registered broker can help you determine the viability of changing and whether it makes prudent financial sense .
Health Insurance Companies can not drop you as a policyholder at will . The only reason thet may drop a policyholder is for not telling of a prexisting condition , fraud , and related misrepresentations . Non payment of premiums and if you are in a group plan with employers , and switch jobs then there is a chance you may stay on through the COBRA act . They can not discontinue coverageyou in the middle of treatment . As with all insurance companiesit is best to be truthful with all questions that are asked and that will save you time and error .
This is a common question most people have and the answer is yes , you can switch your insurance at any time . There is no mandate which states that you can not switch your insurance but the question is should you switch your insurance ? There are several things you want to consider before switching your auto insurance . The most common reason people switch their insurance is because of price . You will find that most states file insurance rates in January and June . So keep in mind depending on when you decide to switch your policy you could be hitting a price increase or decrease depending on what the state has filed . Switching your insurance once or even several times could actually hurt you . Companies are beginning to offer discounts such as loyalty discounts which dont kick in until you have been with them for so many years . Even though you may be saving $ 50 - $ 100 switching to another carrier you could be losing a lot more than that by not staying with your current insurance company . You may find loyalty discounts to range from 5 % -20 % depending on the company which could save you hundreds of dollars . But every situation is different so be sure to consider when your switching your insurance and what discounts you may or may not be losing .
I really do n't know the answer to this question , as I believe that every person who owns and drives a car needs auto insurance . Just think for a moment , if you did n't own auto insurance and you driving a car down a city street , when the car in front of you stops suddenly , you jerk your steering wheel to the side and manage to miss the car in front of you . You open your eyes and look at yourself and see that the airbags protected you and you were not injured ... but you find that you ran head long into the corner liquor store and end up in the middle of the scotch section , having destroyed most of the owners inventory . How would you pay for that ? Savings retirement , income will all be gone , as well as maybe your house and any other property you might own , not to mention your car is toast . This is the reason you need auto insurance , as it protects your finances now and in the future
That is a great question ! I did n't think she liked much of anything , except big piles of cash ! -LRB- I 'm joking , of course -RRB- My guess is that she likes it for the same reason that Dave Ramsey does - it 's cheaper than whole life , if you need to purchase life insurance at all . In their worlds , -LRB- think middle to upper middle class and higher -RRB- , you should purchase term life insurance , save or invest the difference of what your whole life would have cost , and hope that you die within the term period . Some people are able to do that , and so the financial guru 's smell like roses with their good advice . I hope that helps , -LRB- and no offense meant , Mr. Ramsey or Ms. Orman -RRB- , thanks for asking !
If you recall a bell shaped curve you know that most people are somewhere in the middle . Now , think of all the things that can happen to people and realize that the standard rates for life insurance are designed for the people that are somewhere near the middle . Can someone with high blood pressure get life insurance ? I think that many companies will handle that , however , the rate may not be standard . They are not necessarily a standard risk .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
In most circumstances it probably doesnt make any difference when you switch auto policies . Cancellations are treated on a pro-rata basis by many insurance companies . Doing a switch at renewal might be easiest , though . When considering a switch there are two things to consider . The first is the effect dropping coverage with one company might have on the premiums of other insurance policies that might have been bundled . The second is that switching frequently to save a few dollars does not allow you to develop any relationship with the agent , who might be your best friend at the time of a claim .
The cost of long-term care insurance has gone up dramatically in the last 10 years . To get an affordable policy for the average person today is a real challenge for the agent . The middle class consumer has , essentially , been priced out of the market for policy designs that were frequently used 10 years ago . To get an affordable policy , the agent has to think outside the box , and the middle class consumer has to understand the value of long-term care insurance . 1 . No long-term care policy can promise to pay for all of one 's potential end-of-life health care costs , no matter how muchone pays . 2 . Conventional designs are no longer valid for the vast majority of those that want an affordable LTC insurance policy . 3 . Long-term care insurance , however , is still a very important consideration . For a base policy , figure on it costing between $ 200 - $ 400/month depending on age . 4 . Even if the policyone can afford might only pay for 1/3 to 1/2 ofone 's projected costs , it would be worth it . It 's not just about cost , although that is an important factor . LTC insurance is for the caregiver , not the insured . The entire immediate family - and sometimes the extended family - is affected by an elderly loved one that ca n't take care of routine , daily activities , and needs attention 24/7 . The emotional , psychological , and physical energy expended collectively can be a huge impact to the caregiver -LRB- s -RRB- . Being able to afford even a short break now and then from caregiving can be the difference between the caregiver remaining healthy or getting sick as well . That 's the value of long-term care insurance . Some is better than none .
There is no fee that I am aware of to switch from one insurance company to another . The only reason that I am aware of that you want to switch insurance companies is lower cost . If there is a fee involved then you probably will not switch insurance companies . There is no fee to my knowledge to switch
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Happens When Your Homeowners Insurance Drops You ?
Well , if for some reason your company non-renews or cancelsyour Homeowners ' coverage , the best thing to do would be to start researching coverage availablity with other carriers . Though there are many commonalities in underwriting standards among companies , there are also differences . Hopefully another carrier will be able to offer you coverage . If not , check with your insurance professional about coverage that might be available in a state insurance plan . The coveragemay be more limited than you have been used to having , and the pricing may be higher , but this might be another avenue . Finally , if you have a mortgage , they will be notified and if you are not able to obtain coverage on your own , trust me , they will obtain it and pass the premium on to you .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
There are several variables that will determine what happens to the Cash Value -LRB- CV -RRB- . First , as Jerry was saying , in the later years or life of the policy , the Cost of Insurance -LRB- COI -RRB- exceeds the premium you are currently paying -LRB- which hopefully has been level since you purchased it -RRB- . When this happens , the premium would need to increase to keep up with the cost however when there is CV , this is used to pay the difference . Ideally , the crediting rate on the excess funds is enough to provide you with growth even while paying the additional premium . When you take a withdrawal or loan , this effects the CV as well . With a loan , keeping this simple , the death proceeds will be reduced by how much the outstanding loan is . A withdrawal will generally drop the death benefit immediately . When there is enough crediting interest , even with loans and withdrawals , we have seen policies continue to grow . Jerry said it well , Life Insurance is an Asset for you to use . Last , if you have your policy designed with an Increasing Benefit , usually called `` option b '' , the CV will be included into the death benefit . This is one what to stay ahead of inflation especially when you are expected to live a long life .
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Some questions you might ask when considering life insurance are : 1 -RRB- What is the rating of this company ? 2 -RRB- Are the rates guaranteed not to go up ? 3 -RRB- Does this policy have cash value ? If so , please show me an illustration . 4 -RRB- Will you be working with me if I need any assistance with my policy in the future ? 5 -RRB- What happens when the terms ends ? -LRB- if buying Term insurance -RRB- 6 -RRB- What riders are available for this policy ? 7 -RRB- How do I borrow from this policy ? -LRB- if buying Whole or Universal Life -RRB- 8 -RRB- What policy has the best rates for my health ? 9 -RRB- May I also get coverage for my spouse ? 10 -RRB- What if I want to drop this policy in the future ? There are many other questions you could ask , but these are some common ones that people ask me . This assumes you know how much coverage you need , and what type . Otherwise , those are also questions you will want to discuss with your agent .
Can a spouse drop the other spouse from thier health plan ? Usually no without your permission . Unfortunately , this happens in cases of divorce or just prior to . A good HR person will get the request in writing where it should state that if the spouse is being dropped from coverage , their signature should also be on the form when turned in .
That is a great question ! There are a million people that will line up to help you put together a plan . Some will honestly want to help you , and some will look at you like a wolf looks at a fat , three-legged sheep . Please be careful , and go with someone that comes with high recommendations . Here 's what you can do to get started . Take a few minutes , and decide what retirement looks like to you . Are you fishing , travelling , working , not working , debt free ? Now take a look at your current financial status . What do you need to do between here , and retirement to make that happen ? I tell people that if you want to live at your current standard of living in retirement , then you will want to have squirreled away between 8-10 times what your current salary is . If you want to live better than you are now , then you 've really got to get started . Once you 've got an idea of what you need to save , then you can talk to your HR person at work about company match 401k , or other programs they might offer ; You can talk to your insurance agent or banker and get some ideas , or you can find an advisor that can help you take a look at how to make your vision of retirement a comfortable reality . I hope that gives you an idea , feel free to drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
In general , no , home insurance will not cover wet rot . A homeowners policy is there to protect you from the sudden and accidental , not the ongoing . To file a claim , you have to be able to pinpoint what happened and when it happened . Wet rot describes a long time , ongoing circumstance . Your homeowners policy is designed to make you whole after an `` occurrence '' . It 's not designed to maintain your home . If you have a condition that could , potentially , damage your home , it 's the homeowners responsibility to correct that condition to protect your home from future damage . This brings up the question of the cost of your homeowners insurance . Every claim impacts the loss ratio of your company and , ultimately , your rates . Want to control the cost of your homeowners insurance ? Take a higher deductible and pay for the smaller things yourself . You 'll save money in the long run .
That is a great question ! Yes , they can . Generally though , it is because of something that you did , and being dropped was a result of that action . For example , you missed a couple of payments , or you misrepresented something substantial on the application . You generally have to work kind of hard to get dropped , but it will happen , especially if you are a liability or high risk . Thanks for asking !
Many people worry that their life insurance policies will drop them if they develop a health condition , as can happen with health insurance . The fact is , if you filled out your life insurance application honestly , complied with whatever they asked you to do , and got a policy , that policy is yours to keep . You can have a heart attack the next month and it will pay the death benefit . You can start smoking the next year and it will pay the death benefit . You can not be dropped over something you did not know ahead of time . Given that type of guarantee , why not lock your life insurance policy in for as long as you can . If you can get coverage for 30 years or a lifetime instead of 10 , have a need for longer coverage , and can afford it , no one can take it away from you as long you keep paying the premiums .
Any Home or Auto insurance company can drop you . Home insurance is not guaranteed renewable . The company has a right to drop you or raise your premium at each renewal . This can be done because of claims experience , deterioration and maintenance of your home , or in some cases a company will pull out of an area or state completely . This happened in Florida because of the frequency of hurricanes .
Unfortunately , the homeowners insurance company has the `` right '' non-renew your coverage each year they renew the policy . It depends on your specific state if they can drop you mid-policy or not . They normally ca n't drop you mid-policy unless they discover a material misrepresentation by you . They can drop you for non-payment , but for a claim they can only non-renew your policy . If you have additional questions please let me know .
A car insurance company can drop your homeowner 's insurance . It happens every day . For example , if your driving record was clean and you had no claims for 20 years , but you had three recent fire , vandalism or theft claims on your home insurance , there 's a good chance you will be cancelled .
That is a great question ! The first thing that happens is that you are no longer covered if you are involved in an accident . Any damages , injuries , or loss of life will be your financial responsibility , with no help from the insurance company . The second thing that happens is that you now can no longer legally drive . The penalties for being an uninsured driver are stiff , and will leave a black mark on your record that will make it difficult or impossible to get reinsured in the future . Please do not consider dropping your coverage until you have another one in place . Thanks for asking !
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Dropping collision on your car depends on how much you wish to self insure . As long as you do not have a loan you can drop collision anytime . However one of the more common times to consider dropping collision is if your vehicle is worth $ 3500.00 or less . The reason for this thinking is this is the amount uninsured motorist property damage would pick up in the event you are hit by someone with no insurance . Of course your still on your own if you cause the accident or if your involved in a hit and run type situation where you do n't know who caused the accident . You may want to look at what you actually are paying for collision coverage and what the vehicle is worth in a total loss since this is all your going to get .
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Birth Control Covered By Health Insurance ?
Great question , Contraceptives are normally covered by mayor medical , normally there is co-pay or cost involved . However to be totally sure , call your insurance company or take a look in your summary of benefits . You can normally get a summary of benefits booklet mailed or emailed to you from the insurance company .
Most health insurance plans will cover the cost of an IUD . As part of Obamacare , covered participants are supposed to provide contraceptives at no out of pocket costs to the individual . Covered contraceptives generally include birth control pills , the birth control patch -LRB- such as Ortho Evra -RRB- , a diaphragm , contraceptive gel and an IUD .
Some health insurance plans cover a vasectomy . Of course , if it is needed for medical reasons , it will be covered . For birth control reasons -LRB- for lack of a better term -RRB- , coverage can vary . It 's best to check with your current carrier and/or broker and ask them what benefits you have .
Possibly , but not likely . While most health insurance plans cover birth control pills , the `` morning after '' pill is not designed to PREVENT pregnancy , but rather to end a pregnancy in the early stages . Ingestion of the morning after pill can lead to spontaneous abortion . Since it is not technically a preventive medication , good chance your health insurance carrier will deny coverage for the morning after pill .
This is a great question ! Many major medical plans do cover birth control . typically , there is a cost or co pay involved . The best way to figure out if contraceptives are covered is to call the number on your insurance card or take a look in the summary of benefits for your plan .
Voluntary sterilization is often covered under many group health insurance plans . Tubal ligation as well as vasectomy are common forms of permanent birth control . The vasectomy is a much simpler operation usually performed on an outpatient basis in a doctor 's office . Tubal ligation is more invasive , performed under general anesthesia in a hospital . Tubal ligation is often performed in conjunction with other `` female '' surgery such as a hysterectomy or D&C .
All health insurance plans are now required under Obamacare rules to provide coverage for contraceptive devices and medication at no charge to the consumer . This means you , as well as your daughter -LRB- s -RRB- under the age of 19 , can obtain birth control medication without your knowledge or consent and pick up the medication at their pharmacy without a copay .
No , Medicare will not pay for an IUD -LRB- intrauterine device -RRB- or any other birth control devices . If there was a medically necessary reason for IUD placement to treat serious disease , it may be possible that an exception could be made . But generally speaking , IUD 's are not covered under Medicare .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Essure is a medical procedure that is used by women for birth control purposes . A device is implanted into the fallopian tubes and there has been some women that has found it to be satisfactory while others have found it unacceptable . This procedural details can be found in great detail on the internet if you want more details
If a group health plan , health insurance company , or health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- provides maternity benefits , it may not restrict benefits for a hospital stay in connection with childbirth to less than 48 hours following a vaginal delivery or 96 hours following a delivery by cesarean section.You can not be required to obtain preauthorization from your plan in order for your 48-hour or 96-hour stay to be covered . -LRB- However , certain requirements that you give notice to the plan of the pregnancy or the childbirth may apply . -RRB- The law allows you and your baby to be released earlier than these time periods only if the attending provider decides , after consulting with you , that you or your baby can be discharged earlier.In any case , the attending provider can not receive incentives or disincentives to discharge you or your child earlier than 48 hours -LRB- or 96 hours -RRB- . If your state has a law that provides similar hospital stay protections and your plan offers coverage through an insurance policy or HMO , then you may be protected under state law rather than under the Newborns and Mothers Health Protection Act . Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
Get a lawyer , because odds are you will need a court order to force the change . The job of the life insurance company is to honor the contract with the policy owner . The policy owner has control and so gets to designate the beneficiary . At the time of application , the company makes sure the beneficiary has insurable interest . Is he or she a family member ? Business partner ? Charitable recipient ? People with a financial dependence on the insured qualify as beneficiaries . In addition , the processes of prequalification and underwriting are pretty effective in confirming the insured and policy owners are in the right frame of mind to make major financial decisions . No company wants to enter into a legal agreement with another party who is not competent . So these life insurance contracts could be considered pretty solid . Nonetheless , is it possible that there was some kind of extraneous pressure or personal problem that resulted in a bad decision by the policyholder ? Sure . You would have to prove that . And that , of course , it would take time and money . I think pretty valid challenges could conceivably be made . Divorce , remarriage , adoption . Birth of a child . Death of a spouse . All these events could show that one family member was more dependent on the insured than the other . And entitled to the insurance benefit . Perhaps the policyholder was indeed ill , or under severe life stress . Doctors may have to be called upon . Therapists ? Business associates ? I think you can get an idea of just how much work you would have to put into contesting the beneficiary designation on the policy . Make sure it is worth it .
To obtain health insurance coverage , you may contact an agent that is licensed in California . Some agents may sell health insurance for different companies , while others may be restricted to only one company . Or , you may go online to the health companys website . To obtain the most accurate quote , have ready your residence address , the age or date of birth of everyone needing insurance , and possibly a list of any major medical conditions that may effect your policy . If you have a preferred health care provider , be sure that the plan you are looking at is accepted by your doctor and hospital that you prefer using . Once youve decided on where you want your coverage from and what you want covered , you will need to submit an application . Most companies do these online or over the phone . Expect the application process to take anywhere from 10 minutes to an hour , depending on questions asked and the answers provided . Information needed will include names , dates of birth , social security numbers , drivers licenses , medical conditions and a list of current medications . Some companies will follow up with reports from your health care providers . Once all information has been reviewed by the health insurance company , a policy will be sent . In some cases a counter proposal may be sent . Your insurance agent will go over the proposal with you and will let you know what steps need to be done to complete the policy .
Since Medicare covers people over the age of 65 , and those with certain disabilities that have received Social Security benefits for 25 months , it would be very rare for Medicare to cover a circumcision . It would be possible , if someone with Medicare had a true medical need to be circumcisized later in the life , but very rare , as most circumcisions are done at birth . Given the fact that 40 % of births in American are covered by Medicaid , a better question may be `` Does Medicaid cover circumcisions ? '' That varies by state , as 18 states currently do not cover this procedure , primarily due to the fact that it is most often elective , or not necessary . the 18 states that do n't cover circumcisions , along with the year they stopped : Colorado 2011 South Carolina 2011 Louisiana 2005 Idaho 2005 Minnesota 2005 Maine 2004 Montana 2003 Utah 2003 Florida 2003 Missouri 2002 Arizona 2002 North Carolina 2002 California before 1999 North Dakota before 1999 Oregon before 1999 Mississippi before 1999 Nevada before 1999 Washington before 1999
Typically the new born child must be added within 30 days after birth . Please contact your insurance carrier or HR department to do this ASAP . Very important and time sensitive , the sooner the better . The baby may be admitted under it 's own name right after birth for various reasons and coverage must begin then . Most insurance companies require notice within 30 days of birth
You 're eligible for Medicare when you 're turning 65 years old . You can apply for Medicare benefits up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . I recommend applying during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of covered healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
You can apply for Medicare up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . You should apply during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You should add your newborn to your health insurance policy within 30 days of birth . Most policies will automatically cover any newborn baby during those first thirty days . Many children are born with health issues that require ongoing care . If you add your child during the thirty day period there will be no interruption in coverage . Birth of a child is a qualifying life event . This means you can change your plan outside of open enrollment . However if you wait too long you may have a gap in coverage until the next open enrollment period arrives .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Does Long Term Disability Insurance Work ?
Long term disability traditionally covers you until age 65 against prolonged illness and injury . Many advisers call disability insurance , paycheck protection . Most working Americans have 90 days in cash reserves , so a traditional elimination or waiting period is 90 days before tax free benefits begin . Disability insurance is part of a solid defensive plan and in tandem with term life insurance can deliver the peace of mind workers need .
You select how long you want your long term disability policy to work when you buy it . You can pick it to last a number of years , or you can pick it to last to age 65 . The length of coverage and elimination period will affect the price you pay .
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Some things to consider when buying disability insurance are : 1 -RRB- Do you want short term disability insurance , or long term disability insurance , or both ? Long term disability is recommended if you can not afford both , as the effects of being unable to work for many months or years is the most devastating . 2 -RRB- How much -LRB- what % -RRB- of your income do you wish to replace ? It usually makes sense to get as much as you can . 3 -RRB- Do you want to spend more to have Own Occupation feature ? If not , you will need to go back to work when you can do any job . With `` own occ '' you will be paid until you can go back to your own occupation . 4 -RRB- What about Residual Disability ? Getting a policy that offers Residual Disability enables you to receive a partial benefit based proportionate to the amount of income lost when able to resume working part time -LRB- unlike Partial Disability , which just pays a set % -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What does your policy cover ? Make sure it covers illness and injury , and review the conditions covered .
Long term disability insurance is the most undersold insurance product on the market . Statistically speaking over 50 % of hard working Americans are living pay check to paycheck . If any of them were to become sick or injured and could no longer work , it would bankrupt the family . Long term disability insures their most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . The minimum waiting period to receive disability through Social Security is 9 months if everything goes well and often it does not . Long term disability is more than a good idea for working Americans it is a must .
Technically , no . Medicare was designed to help the elderly pay for acute sickness and accidents from whichone can heal relatively quickly . It does not cover chronic illness or prolonged rehabilitation from an accident . However , Medicare will provide payment of costs for some `` short-term '' recovery for the elderly that are enrolled in Medicare part A & B . There are prequalifications and limitations to what it will pay for , how much it will pay , the type of care it will pay for , and for how long -LRB- maximum of 100 days -RRB- . Payment for long-term care is usually paid out of pocket , or by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . To receive payment for care from the latter , one must be `` impoverished '' as defined by the state that they live in , and they usually must be in a facility -LRB- Medicaid/Medical only pay a few hundred dollars a month of home care -RRB- . The only other solution to the problem of paying for long-term care , either at home or in a facility , is long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- . This sector of the health insurance industry is in a bit of turmoil right now and if you have decided that you want to explore LTCi , make sure that you work with someone that is a specialist in this area . There are an infinite number of designs in coverage which can vary the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- by thousands of dollars a year . Also , be sure that you are working with agents that only work with the best LTCi companies in the industry , those that have strong financials , high ratings , and are committed to the field . The most important thing is to have a plan . Your plan may or may not include LTCi . But , if it does , buy no later than your mid-fifties as the price really starts to climb after that . Dont depend on Medicare for the payment of long-term care costs .
No these are two totally separate types of insurance plans used to cover totally different needs . Disability insurance can be either long term or short term . Long term disability is used to replace your income for the rest of your working life . It usually has a bit longer elimination period 90-180-360 days before benefits begin to pay . The benefits can pay as long as age 67 when social security benefits start . A short term disability insurance plan pays benefits sooner within days , but only lasts a few months or up to a couple of years . Both disability insurance plans are insuring most peoples most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . Disability insurance should be purchased when a person starts working for a living . Long term care insurance is meant to cover a person that can no longer care for themselves . The person needs home health care , assisted living or a nursing home . Usually the time to purchase a long term care policy is when a person gets older , typically in their 50s or 60s , but some wait until their 70s . It really depends more upon their health and lifestyle . Just do n't wait until you have been diagnosed with an affliction , then is too late .
Disability insurance policies typically have a 9 month to one year waiting period before they will cover pregnancy and childbirth . If you are considering having children , that is the time to sign up for the short-term disability . You may also want to consider a policy with a shorter elimination period . The elimination period is how long you must be out of work before the policy starts paying . Many policies have four weeks or longer elimination periods . The policy will only pay as long as the doctor says you need to be out of work , not how long your company allows you to be off work . The policy also only pays a portion of your salary , typically around 50 % to 60 % . If you dont get a disability policy through work , the next best option is often professional associations . You can also get an individual policy through an insurance agent .
Actually , long term disability insurance and long term care insurance are not the same type of policy nor do they cover the same things . Disability insurance is to replace a percentage of your income when you have an illness or injury so severe you can no longer work . Long term care insurance is primarily for your aging years to cover home health , assisted living and nursing homes when you are no longer able to take care of yourself . Long term disability insurance should be purchased at a young age as soon as you go to work earning a wage . Long term care insurance should be purchased between your late 50s or early 60s .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
end question
start question
annuities
How Are Fixed Annuities Taxed ?
Non-qualified tax deferred annuity distributions are taxed as ordinary income at the annuity owners effective tax bracket rate . The annuity basis , or original contributions are distributed tax free .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
A non-qualified , tax deferred fixed rate annuity is only as guaranteed as the contract provisions outline and is only as good as the annuity insurance company that issued the contract . That being said , many financial stable annuity insurance companies offer a non-qualified tax deferred fixed rate annuities , generally at 5 , 7 and 10 year periods . A non-qualified , tax deferred variable annuity is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . ;
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Tax deferred , guaranteed fixed annuities offer a fixed interest rate over a fixed period of time , i.e. 5 , 7 or 10 years as an example . The interest rate is credited to the annuity policy and accumulates tax deferred until distributions , when gain is taxed as ordinary income at the annuity owners effective tax bracket .
Is an indexed annuity a fixed annuity ? No , not usually unless provisions exist within the indexed annuity to mimic a fixed annuity . With a fixed annuity you 're provided a set interest rate for the year from the insurance company . It is up to the company to come through as they 've committed themselves for that outcome . An index annuity on the other hand , has potential for a variety of returns established by the policy owner . A return could be as high as 10 % for a year or zero percentage based on how the individual creates the policy .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Flu Shots ?
The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- mandated many preventive benefits for adults and children , including flu shots . Typically , any deductible , copay or coinsurance is waived for qualified preventive benefits . This would apply to both individual and group medical plans . Before getting the shot , however , it is wise to quickly consult your agent/broker to verify your benefits for the specific shot you are receiving . If you do not currently have health insurance , you can easily and quickly purchase a plan from an experienced broker or a reputable health insurance website that offers free online quotes with no obligation . Exchange plans will not require any medical questions to be answered .
Most health insurance plans will cover preventive care , including flu shots . Some plans will have restrictions on immunizations and will only cover these shots if you are under age 6 . Optional immunizations for older children and adults may not be covered by your plan . Many plans will cover flu shots if you are in a high risk group . High risk individuals include children , elderly and those with compromised immune systems .
Flu shots administered by CVS are typically covered by Medicare Part B as long as the person receiving the flu shot has not assigned his/her health benefits to an HMO -LRB- Health Maintenance Organization -RRB- . CVS is an approved Medicare provider of flu shots and the shot can be given right at the pharmacy location .
Medicare Part B typically covers flu shots during flu season . One per season is the standard coverage . Of course , you have to be on Medicare to receive the coverage . Your physician must accept assignment for providing the shot to you and the Part B deductible would not be applied . If your physician does not accept assignment , the flu shot is still free but you may have to pay a nominal charge for the doctor 's fee .
Most health insurance plans will cover preventive care , including flu shots . Some plans will have restrictions on immunizations and will only cover these shots if you are under age 6 . Optional immunizations for older children and adults may not be covered by your plan . Many plans will cover flu shots if you are in a high risk group . High risk individuals include children , elderly and those with compromised immune systems .
The shingles vaccine shot is generally covered under your prescription coverage . Medicare Part D stand-alone prescription drug plans generally cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . Medicare Part A -LRB- your hospital insurance -RRB- and Part B -LRB- your physician insurance -RRB- do not cover the shingles vaccine shot .
It depends on what specific policy you have . While many carriers ' policies cover flu shots , not every policy under a carrier does . You will need to verify with the carrier or your policy 's agent to see if it covers the flu shot at 100 % , partial coverage , or not at all . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine . It ` sgenerally covered under your prescription coverage . Medicare Part D stand-alone prescription drug plans will generally cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Unfortunately no , Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine . This vaccine is generally covered under a Part D prescription drug plan - most Part D plans will cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare will pay for the flu shot once per flu season -LRB- i.e. once per year -RRB- . Shots are offered starting in the fall , and the flu season in the United States is considered to run from October to May . Medicare will pay for flu shots from providers that accept Medicare assignment .
Medicare will cover vaccines and immunizations that help prevent influenza -LRB- the flu -RRB- , Pneumonia , and Hepatitis B -LRB- for those at risk -RRB- - you would generally not be not be subject to any deductible , coinsurance , or copayments if your provider accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . For doctors who do not accept assignment , they may charge you an excess charge - Medicare supplement plans F & G can cover these charges for you . Some other shots can be covered by Medicare for other situations such as getting bitten by a dog and receiving a rabies shot or stepping on a rusty nail and getting a tetanus shot . You would generally be looking at Part D coverage for other vaccines .
The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- mandated many preventive benefits for adults and children , including flu shots . Typically , any deductible , copay or coinsurance is waived for qualified preventive benefits . This would apply to both individual and group medical plans . Before getting the shot , however , it is wise to quickly consult your agent/broker to verify your benefits for the specific shot you are receiving . If you do not currently have health insurance , you can easily and quickly purchase a plan from an experienced broker or a reputable health insurance website that offers free online quotes with no obligation . Exchange plans will not require any medical questions to be answered .
Studies have indicated that employees with health insurance tend to have lower levels of absences from work due to illnesses . This is logical when you stop to think that an insured person has lower cost access to the health care system than an uninsured person does . Therefore , the insured employee is more likely to get annual physical exams , take advantage of preventive care treatment and screenings , or just do things like get a flu shot than their uninsured counterparts . These advantages extend to the employee 's insured dependents as well as parents may have to take off less to take their children or a spouse to the doctor . This is another reason that providing health insurance coverage to their employees is an advantage for employers .
Medicare Part B covers certain doctor 's services , outpatient care , medical supplies including medical equipment , some preventative services such as flu shots , ambulance , mental health , and limited outpatient prescription drugs . There is a co-pay required for benefits received under Medicare Part B. Medicare supplement plans can cover the co-pay and pay for things that Medicare Part A and B do not cover .
Medicare Part A and Part B do not cover the shingles vaccine . The vaccine is covered under Part D , prescription drug coverage . Contact your drug plan to see what your co-pay would be for the shingles vaccine . Medicare Part B will cover a yearly flu shot and the pneumonia vaccine .
In my state and when Obamacare kicks in completely I believe all states will cover vaccinations as preventative care . Depending on your state , you may already have kids vaccinations covered in full and adults as well . I know that when I visit my doctor , each year I get a flu shot , it is covered 100 % by my plan .
Medicare Part B covers your doctors and outpatient services such as blood tests , X-Rays , MRI 's . and other outpatient testing . Part B also covers Durable Medical Equipment such as walkers , emergency service , flu shots , diabetic foot exams , Glaucoma testing , home health services -LRB- limited -RRB- , dialysis , and certain types of drugs in addition to an annual wellness exam . For a comprehensive answer see Medicare & You 2013 edition or go to Medicare.gov . You can also speak with a good agent specializing in Medicare and the needs of older adults .
Yes , Medicare does cover pneumococcal shots under Medicare Part B medical insurance . It 's always good to discuss with your health provider if you do need the shot since most individuals only need the shot once in their lifetime . You pay nothing if your health provider accepts payment in full from Medicare .
Medicare does not cover the zoster vaccine . Zostavax -LRB- the common name for the vaccine -RRB- is for the shingles vaccine shot . Vaccine shots are covered under Part D prescription drug plans . You can use the plan finder tool on the Medicare.gov website to see what plans in your area will cover the vaccine shot .
Yes , a pneumonia shot is covered by Medicare Part B for anyone receiving Medicare . Pneumococcal shots are usually only needed once in a lifetime to prevent pneumonia . If you doctor does n't accept assignment , you may have to pay an additional fee for the doctor 's services , but not for the shot itself .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Would An Insurance Company Deny Life Insurance ?
The main reason -LRB- s -RRB- a life insurance would deny Life Insurance are : 1 -RRB- Medical Issues -LRB- pre-existing conditions -RRB- 2 -RRB- Your financials do not warrant the benefit amount you are seeking If they deny due to medical reasons , you could apply for a `` simplified issue '' product . This is not guaranteed , but there is no paramed -LRB- medical exam -RRB- so it may be easier to get issued . Of course , the premium is higher , but it may be an alternative .
In my business as an impaired risk life insurance agent , we have a lot of people come to us who have been denied life insurance elsewhere . I have found these to be the top five reasons that they were declined : 1 -RRB- The product they applied for was not meant to cover their health condition 2 -RRB- The application had missing or incorrect information 3 -RRB- Something was on their medical records that they were not aware of 4 -RRB- Complete records or other underwriting requirements were never received by the underwriter 5 -RRB- Everything was done correctly but the person 's health just did n't warrant approval This article has some tips to help you avoid those declines : WEBSITELINK
If you were denied , health insurance the question we must ask is why were you denied coverage ? Depending on the reason and/or reasons why you were denied coverage , the next steps that you would take would be to look to obtain coverage through a different carrier or seek out a guaranteed issuance plan .
That is a great question ! A better one is why were you denied ? There are extremely few reasons why you could be legally denied , and I 'd sure like to know what their reason was . If they said `` pre-existing condition '' , you do n't want to insure through them anyway , as they are breaking the law , and probably are n't very trustworthy in their other dealings either . Count them as doing you a favor , and reapply with a different company , preferably one under the www.heathcare.gov site , where you might even qualify for help paying for the policy you 'll get . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Why do people get denied life insurance ? The biggest reason that people get denied is because the policy they applied for is not one that they qualify for . They may not qualify because their health , their age , or even their income does not fit the guidelines for that policy . The sad thing is , many declines could be prevented by visiting with knowledgeable agents who understand what products best fit each person 's situation . And many less people would be declined if they would answer the agent 's questions without trying to hide things . Those things usually catch up with you in the end , so it is much less frustrating to get them all out in the open at the start and allow your agent to find you a policy that you indeed can get and not be denied .
That is a great question ! But do n't worry , there are insurance companies out there that will insure you . Without knowing which company you applied with , and why you were denied , I can tell you that even between companies there can be a great difference between who would issue , and who would deny over the same medical issue . Please contact me , and I 'll be happy to guide you to someone who will write you . Whatever you do , do not apply to several companies , you will send out red flags that will work against you . Ok ? Thanks for asking !
If you applied for Health Insurance and your application was denied , the company you applied to will have to give you a reason why it was denied . They should mail you a letter stating a reason . Since the Affordable Care Act was passed you can not be denied based on your health history , so as long as you are providing truthful , relevant info on the app , getting health insurance should be easy .
It really depends on the State you are in . In California if someone loaned their car to a friend and the friend caused the accident the insurance policy covering the car that did the damage is responsible to pay the claim if they were at fault . However there may be exclusions on the policy that could deny coverage . Without really knowing more it 's difficult to say in your situation . If a claim is being denied I would ask specifically as to why it is being denied . You can fall back on your own insurance to cover the loss to your vehicle providing you have collision coverage .
There are a variety of reasons why life insurance would be denied to a potential insured applying for coverage : Medical issues , no financial justification , the recreational activities are too dangerous , there is no insurable interest , the travel destination during the next two years is too dangerous , the driving record is too egregious , drug abuse , vocation hazard , etc. . There are reasons that a death claim would be denied like fraud or suicide in the first two years . In the first two years after the policy has been kept in force there is a contestability period for suicide , misrepresentation and fraud . Keep in mind that certain life insurance companys death claim due diligence processes may continue after the two year contestability period based on some forms of fraud and criminal activity surrendering the insureds death . If it feasible that a life insurance company to experience financial problems , fall into receivership of the state -LRB- a form of bankruptcy -RRB- and affect claims paying ability .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
If you have had a claim denied and you disagree with the determination in the letter that was sent to you the letter will also have an explanation of how you should respond . Generally the letter would state you have 30 days to put in writing why you feel your claim should not be denied . State all the facts clearly then mail the letter in to the address on the letter sent to you and your rebuttal will be reviewed . If you are still denied but feel you are right and the insurance provider is incorrect in their assessment you can write to your states department of insurance and they can look into the matter . I also highly recommend you discuss the matter with your agent .
Yes . They can deny you as long as the reason is not discriminatory . Insurer 's have specific sets of rules that they file with the states they operate in , that dictate who will be able to get what sorts of rates . As long as they apply those same rules fairly to everyone they can turn you down if you do n't fit their profile . If you are having trouble getting insurance due to driving record , criminal convictions etc , most states have a high risk pool that will accept anyone , but the rates may be very high . The insurance company that denies you does have to provide you a reason why they are denying you !
There are a variety of reasons why life insurance would be denied to a potential insured applying for coverage : Medical issues , no financial justification , the recreational activities are too dangerous , there is no insurable interest , the travel destination during the next two years is too dangerous , the driving record is too egregious , drug abuse , vocation hazard , etc. . There are reasons that a death claim would be denied like fraud or suicide in the first two years .
Great question ! A better one would be why would you want to risk living in one ? In almost every case , if an insurance company finds that there were laws being broken in the event that causes the claim to be filed , they will delay , or deny the claim pending an investigation of the circumstances . If it turns out you were living at great risk for a claim in an apartment that you should n't legally have been in , I 'd expect them to be slow to pay , and quick to deny . Please rethink your idea of living there , okay ? Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! There are extremely few reasons why a health insurer could deny you coverage , and the best one would be a poor payment history with them on your part . Health insurers can not deny you coverage for any health condition that you may have , that unfortunate practice was banned by President Obama 's Affordable Care Act legislation -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
There are any number of reasons why a carrier would deny your health insurance application . Most carriers do not issue coverage to those who are in the country illegally . If you are incarcerated or employed in a hazardous occupation you may be denied health insurance . The most common reason is the cost of your health care is more expensive than the carrier is allowed to charge to cover the risk .
To be honest , I am not sure if you are asking about being denied a policy , or having a claim denied . If you are denied a policy by one company , just have your Insurance Professional find another company whose underwriting standards would enable them to offer coverage . If you are denied coverage on a claim , again , check with your Insurance Professional about that company 's coverage terms and conditions and what their appeal process might be . If still unsatisfied , you could always send a letter to your state 's InsuranceDepartment and ask them to inquire .
Life insurance claims can be denied but it is very rare for a life insurance company to not pay the death benefit proceeds if the life insured has died and proof of death has been submitted . If death was by suicide or a material misrepresentation in the first two policy years of the policy , the claim will be investigated . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in very limited circumstances of fraud .
Usually , upon presentation of proof of death and a claim form , the claim is paid . However , a claim could be denied , depending on circumstances . In Canada , a claim within the first 2 years could be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . This essentially means you did not tell or disclose the truth on something that would have changed an underwriting decision . After 2 years you would have to have committed fraud which is much more difficult to prove . A life insurance contract should be approached as a contract of utmost good faith where all parties give full disclosure . In other words , be sure and tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth . Suicide within the first 2 years or last reinstatement would also cause a claim to be denied . If there was an accidental death rider , then that portion of the claim would not be paid unless the death is deemed accidental . . Laws are similar , but vary by jurisdiction . You should check the wording in your policy , your local insurance act and , if necessary , a lawyer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A life insurance policy must be in force to pay benefits to the beneficiary . Life insurance companies have denied claims for several reasons . There is an exclusion for suicide within the first two years of most policies . Claims have been denied for failure to report important medical conditions . Sometimes the company will deny a claim when the death occurs under unusual circumstances . When a claim is denied the premiums are generally returned .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Renew Car Insurance Early ?
If you have received your billing for the upcoming policy period , you can immediately pay it . However , with the vast majority of carriers , there is no discount or reduction in your premium when you pay well in advance before the due date . Although you are probably earning a very low interest -LRB- if any -RRB- on your checking account or money market , why not leave the money in there as long as possible ?
This can be complicated but I will try to keep it simple . If you have a Whole Life Policy , the premium is based on how long you are expected to live , averaged out over that length of time the policy is expected to be in force . Term Insurance seems cheaper because it is not designed to cover you for your whole life . That is why the cheapest form of life insurance is one year term . Every time a term policy renews the premium goes up until it eventually becomes unaffordable . Because a whole life policy averages these premiums out , you are paying more in the early years than term but in the later years you premium would be less than term , since the policy does not need to renew . The excess money collected in the early years is invested and after expenses the balance is put into the cash value . They use a lot of complicated formulas to determine this but this is a simplified explanation .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
You can switch your auto insurance in the middle of a policy period . But unless your savings is enough to offset ant early cancellation penalty , you may want to wait for the renewal . To determine if it is wise to cancel early , a licensed and registered broker can help you determine the viability of changing and whether it makes prudent financial sense .
This one is easy to answer : do nothing . Yes , thats right . Virtually all term policies these days are guaranteed renewable . This means that you will retain coverage without going through underwriting again . So when it renews , you will get a bill for the renewed rate . Or , if your policy is on automatic bank draft , the renewal rate will be deducted from your bank account . Next question : what will the renewal rate be ? The thing is , you wont know until the policy renews . You will note on the data page of your policy that guaranteed maximum renewal rates are illustrated . These numbers can be very scary because they represent worst-case scenario rate increases . The actual renewal rates are determined when the contract renews , not when it is issued . Fortunately , actual renewal rates typically dont come close to these guaranteed maximum numbers . But they can be high . Once the premium guarantee period is over , the policy can renew at a rate much larger than the original premium . If the insurance carrier needs cash , or wants to bolster its reserves , or for any other reason wants more money , renewal term premiums are a good way to get it Is this bad ? Is this good ? It all depends . If the insured unfortunately has cancer , or some other very serious high risk factor , then even that high rate might seem like a bargain . If you still need life insurance , and you cant qualify for a better deal elsewhere , then even if you pay much more money in premium , the death benefit can still be worth it . But if fortunately you are healthy and do not have high risk factors in your lifestyle , then you just might qualify for a better rate with another company . Go for it ! Just make sure you get prequalified so you know before applying that the change would be in your favor . And very important : dont drop your current policy until the new one is in force . You want to avoid a gap in coverage .
Yes people 60 years old can buy insurance . There are many reasons to buy life insurance at 60 but interestingly enough people in their early 60 's may desire to defer their Social Security benefits to age 70to max their benefits out . But they may be afraid of dying too early and missing out on taking their SS benefits early . A low cost term insurance policycan cover 10 years cheaply and replace those lost SS benefits to your heirs . The higher SS income may pay for those cheap premiums many times over . Weather you live long or pass early your heirs are still taken care of . If you live long then the deferral of SS income can be very significantly better .
Term insurance comes with many option . First , consider the reason for buying the insurance and find a product that meets that need . If you are covering a mortgage for example you might want to consider a 20 or 30 year term policy . There are two options here . Decreasing or Mortgage term or level term . I prefer level term due to the fact that many people do not remain in the same home for the life of the mortgage any more . There are policies that will add mortgage disability and Return of Premium . Next , how long will I need this coverage , 1 year , 5 years , ten years ? Also , what is my budget ? With term insurance the shorter the term the less the initial premium , so a on year term will be less than a 20 year term , at least initially . Every time the policy renews , the premium will increase . Is the policy renewable and convertible . Renewable means that you can renew the policy at the end of the term even if your health gets bad . Convertible means that you can convert the policy , or part of the policy to a whole life plan , regardless of health . If you need to keep the insurance for a lengthy period of time I highly recommend a policy that is renewable and convertible . A good agent can help you determine your best choice for your individual situation .
Each Medigap plan can be offered as a `` select '' plan . The premiums for these plans are generally less than those of the traditional Medigap plans , however , they require you use in-network doctors and hospitals -LRB- much like how an HMO works -RRB- to receive full benefits -LRB- except in the case of an emergency -RRB- . If you use a provider outside of the network , you may be responsible for the co-insurance that is not covered under Original Medicare as long as you use a doctor/hospital that accepts Medicare , If you buy a select Medigap plan and decide you would rather have a standard Medigap plan , you can change it to the standard plan within 12 months of when you started the coverage . A common question with select plans is `` if I move , can I take my coverage with me ? . Under select Medigap plans , you would have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a new Medigap plan which plans are available depends on your zip code as not every plan is available in a given location . If applying for a new Medigap plan via a guaranteed-issue right , you can apply as early as 60 calendar days and up to 63 days after your coverage ended to buy a plan . Under a standard plan , you can take the plan with you as they are guaranteed renewable and have no networks . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Generally , when you buy an annuity you 're going to keep it for the life of the contract . Annuities can be cancelled early , but you will likely have surrender charges and certain tax implications involved if you do . What kind of annuity you have may have different penalties for surrendering the annuity early . If you surrender the annuity before 591/2 , I believe you can face a 10 % federal tax penalty on the value of the annuity . You should definitely talk it over with your annuity agent before making any decisions so you know what may happen if you surrender the annuity early . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Driving without car insurance can have both legal and financial impacts upon your life . Caveat , this is geared towards Michigan drivers . Financially : if you get into a collision and are negligent , you could be sued for physical damages to the other driver/passengers . Without insurance you will be on the hook for the entire judgment against you . Furthermore , if you are driving a new car you will either be out the money you spent on the car , or you will owe the leasing company or lender the value of the car . Legal : in Michigan driving without proof of no-fault insurance can result in a $ 500 ticket and three points on your license . So you will be out $ 500 immediately , and a huge increase in your insurance upon renewal . This is assuming you will still have the same insurance and not get a non-renewal notice . I hope this helps .
The main difference between Term and Universal life insurance is that it is possible to continue a Universal policy all the way through a person 's life even if they live to 100 . I say possible because more often than not it does n't work out that way . But if one were to `` over fund '' the policy in the early years of the policy or continue to increase the premiums they pay as the cost of insurance goes up with their age they could keep the policy going . Where with a Term policy it will end and may not be renewed in most cases past age 80 .
Starting a retirement plan -LRB- or planning for retirement -RRB- should start as early as possible . Even if it 's just $ 10 or $ 25 per month while you 're in your early 20s , it will pay huge dividends -LRB- figuratively -RRB- as the money continues to grow . My employer offered matching contributions for my 401K . I started immediately and it made a big positive difference in my retirement planning . I started and never stopped . Diversification is important at all times . A full-time financial adviser or broker -LRB- not a marketer or advertiser -RRB- is your best resource . They can monitor your progress , make changes and guide you to an early and enjoyable retirement . Putting dollars in your pocket is their goal .
Generally , when you buy an annuity you 're going to keep it for the life of the contract . Annuities can be cancelled early , but you will likely have surrender charges and certain tax implications involved if you do . What kind of annuity you have may have different penalties for surrendering the annuity early . If you surrender the annuity before 591/2 , I believe you may/can face a 10 % federal tax penalty on the value of the annuity . You should definitely talk it over with your annuity agent before making any decisions so you know what may happen if you surrender the annuity early . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
Automobiles have been insured in the US since the late 1890 's and with good reason . Americans love to drive and it became obvious early on in the use of cars , that they could cause great injury and property damage so evolved the early auto insurance . As cars themselves became more costly the need for physical damage coverage also became necessary since folks could not buy the car all at once and lenders required protection for their collateral . Even into the mid twentieth century it was not uncommon to have a different agent and or company to handle liability and physical damage coverage . As the industry grew there was and there is a better recognition that major personal injury or fatality could be caused by cars.States also then became the conveyor of the right to be on the roads and so it became necessary to be able to post a bond that you would pay damages caused by you and your auto or provide assurance to the rest of the world that you have a capacity to pay for damages through an insurance policy . So insurance has responded to what society has thought was a basic tenant of responsibility and this has been codified in most states with expectations of the minimum amount of coverage you must have to be authorized to drive in the specific state . Some folks might suggest to you that all insurance is alike and therefore is a commodity . Do n't be drawn into that false premise . Every one has different asserts to protect and specific needs that only can only be addressed with good active communication with your company or agent .
Renewable Life Insurance is life insurance that can be renewed when the policy ends . When the policy is renewed , coverage is extended for another set period of time at a higher rates . When annually renewable , the policy will be extended for one year at that price , then can be renewed the following year at a higher price if you so choose .
Many term life insurance policies are renewable to age 80 or 90 . Unless you have some type of rider that guarantees renewability at reasonable rates , your premium during the renewal period will jump sky high . And of course , if you are still alive when the renewable period ends , you may be unable to find a new policy , especially if you have developed a serious health condition . Rather than allow your term policy to enter the renewable period , it is usually a better option to convert part or all of your term insurance to permanent insurance while you can -LRB- if you indeed want your life insurance to continue -RRB- . Not all policies are convertible , and if they are , they will have strict guidelines as to how long you have to convert them to permanent insurance . So check on these features long before your term will end . In essence , converting will allow you to keep the same health rating you had when you applied for your term policy , regardless of your health at the time of conversion . The rates will be higher because you are older , and because you will be paying premiums for permanent insurance . However , they may not be as high as the renewable rates would have been , and your rates after converting often are locked in for your lifetime .
It depends on the type . Assuming you consistently pay your premiums , if you have term insurance , it can expire . If you have permanent insurance , then no . Term insurance keeps the premiums fixed and guaranteed for a specific number of years -LRB- e.g. 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . After the term period has expired , the premiums change to annual renewable term insurance and increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- . You can elect to continue the existing term insurance policy up until age 90 or 95 -LRB- with most policies -RRB- , however , the price to keep that policy in force becomes astronomical and you would never pay it past the first couple of years . Most people replace a term insurance policy with a new term or permanent policy . Permanent insurance is designed to cover you for the rest of your life . The only way a permanent insurance can expire early is if it 's `` dialed down '' - meaning the death benefit is designed to only go to a specific age/policy year -LRB- e.g. dialed down to age 90 -RRB- . Dialing down a policy can be useful to reduce your premiums , but still provide good coveragelongevity . I hope the input helps . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That process is a little more complicated , but it certainly can be done . A mortgage company can not compel you to stay with a carrier . We have been successful in keeping the transition as easy as possible for our clients with a coule of approaches . The most effective , and frankly this is the easiest , is talk to your insurance professional early , at least 45 days in advance of your current policy 's renewal . That way , your agent will have time to prepare an invoice that can be sent directly to your mortgage company along with the new policy declaration sheet and copy of a written cancellation request which would be sent to your current insurer . We have found that most effective in receiving the required annual premium withthe least disruption to you .
Yes . Most insurance policies will renew indefinitely upon the designated renewal period , unless something happens . Some examples of things that can happen that will cease the automatic renewal are : you cancel your policy ; you do n't pay your premium ; you make a lot of claims and your insurance company submits a letter of non-renewal ; you committed fraud and the insurance company cancels the policy . These are just a few of the reasons a policy might cease . However , absent some type of notice your policy will renew . I hope this helps .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Does A Roth IRA Double Every 7 Years ?
The fact that it is a Roth IRA is irrelevant . The doubling of an investment has to do with the interest rate it is earning . If you use the Rule of 72 , a formula by Albert Einstein , it is a great measurement of doubling money . The rule is simple , divide the number 72 by the interest rate you are receiving -LRB- 72/10 = 7.2 -RRB- , and you will find the number of years it will take to double your money . It is called the Rule of 72 because at 10 % interest , the money will double every 7.2 years . So in order to double your Roth IRA every 7 years it must be earning just over 10 % . This is a very aggressive estimate with current interest rates around 1 % to 2 % .
The fact that it is a Roth IRA is irrelevant . The doubling of an investment has to do with the interest rate it is earning . If you use the Rule of 72 , a formula by Albert Einstein , it is a great measurement of doubling money . The rule is simple , divide the number 72 by the interest rate you are receiving -LRB- 72/10 = 7.2 -RRB- , and you will find the number of years it will take to double your money . It is called the Rule of 72 because at 10 % interest , the money will double every 7.2 years . So in order to double your Roth IRA every 7 years it must be earning just over 10 % . This is a very aggressive estimate with current interest rates around 1 % to 2 % .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
There are several rules that determine your eligibility to open a Roth IRA . 1 -RRB- You must first have an income . Did you have earned income in the current tax year ? 2 -RRB- If you earned income , did your income exceed the limits set by the federal government ? This income limit changes every year and is depends on your marital status and tax filing status to determine the maximum income . You qualify for a Roth IRA based upon your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You can not contribute more into a Roth IRA than you earned in income . For example , if you earned $ 5,000 for 2014 , that is your maximum contribution . 4 -RRB- The contribution limit in 2014 was $ 5,500 maximum . 5 -RRB- There is no maximum age where you are limited or prohibited from making a contribution to a Roth IRA . 6 -RRB- You are not required to take a mandatory distribution at age 70.5 like qualified IRA 's . 7 -RRB- You can contribute to a Roth IRA even if you participate in a retirement plan at work . Depending on circumstances there may be other rules but this gives you a few ideas .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
The Internal Revenue Code changes every year . However , it is highly unlikely that the provision that created the Roth IRA would be changed in such a way as to affect people who already have Roth IRAs . The law could change to make Roth IRA no longer available but it is highly unlikely that that a change such as that would affect currently Roth IRAs .
In California the answer is anabsoluteyes . California is governed by proposition 103guidelinesand one of the major rating factors is driving record . Every personal lines auto insurance carrier must rate according to your driving record so 1 point will have an impact . This impact can be quite significant . 2 points in a 3 year period and you are no longer considered a California a good driver . This can cause rates to easily double in many cases . I often see clients who move in from out of state who have points on their driving record get a big shock to find out there rates areaffectedby a ticket . So what is a point you may ask . Any minor moving violation is 1 point . A major moving violation can be 2 points with a DUI coming in at 4 points . A minor at-fault accident is 1 point . A at-fault accident that includes bodily injury is 2 points . You may attend traffic school for a minor violation in most areas once every 18 months . All the rest you just have to wait out the 3 years until the points drop off your record . Also some insurance carriers reward drivers for clean driving records that go beyond 3 years so even though your points may have dropped off you still may not be receiving the best rates possible until 5-7 years . And by the way , Insurance carriers in California will check the driving record once a year minimum if not more often . If you move from one carrier to the next an upfront motor vehicle record is always ran .
A Roth IRA isnt better . A Roth IRA is different . Contributions for a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- reduce your current income tax . Contributions to a Roth IRA do not . Distributions from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are fully taxable as ordinary income . Distributions from a Roth IRA are not taxable at all . The limits to how much you can put into a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are quite generous . The limits to contributions to a Roth IRA are restrictive . There are taxes and possible penalties if you withdraw money from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- prior to age 59.5 . You can withdraw from the capital invested from a Roth IRA without tax consequences . There are advantages to both .
A Roth IRA is not related to etrade in any direct way unless you simply have your Roth IRA as part of your etrade account . Let 's look at the basic definitions . A Roth IRA is an Individual Retirement Arrangement -LRB- see IRS Publication 590 -RRB- that is generally not taxed if you meet certain conditions . Your Roth IRA can contain a wide variety of financial products including stocks , bonds , mutual funds , CDs , annuities and much more . Etrade is generally considered an online discount stock brokerage service for self-directed investors . You can open a Roth IRA at thousands of institutions . One of those financial institutions is etrade . Whether that would be `` good '' is largely dependent on you and your choices of how you invest your Roth IRA funds .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
Individual retirement accounts -LRB- IRA -RRB- are allowed under the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The primary difference between a Roth IRA and a regular IRA is when money is taxed . Deposits in a regular IRA are deductible from current income tax ; deposits to a Roth IRA are not . In both cases the interest earned on the accounts is not currently taxable . When all the necessary conditions are met , withdrawals from a regular IRA are taxed as earned income in the year received . Withdrawals from the Roth IRA are free of any income tax . There are other differences that affect estate planning and required distributions .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Oldest Life Insurance Company ?
The oldest insurance company in the world isprobably Lloyd 's of London . In the US , the first life insurance company was First Presbyterian , a stock company . The firstmutuallife insurance company was the New England , now owned by MetLife .
Does it really matter how many there are , but rather which are the largest and highest rated and oldest ? I would suggest you check out the top few and decide for yourself who makes you feel comfortable . New York Life is America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company . We have been around for 160 years .
The oldest insurance company in the world isprobably Lloyd 's of London . In the US , the first life insurance company was First Presbyterian , a stock company . The firstmutuallife insurance company was the New England , now owned by MetLife .
I am going to keep this simple . Let 's start with Term Life . Term Life Insurance covers you for the term you selected . The common term periods are 10-15-20-30 years . The premiums are usually guaranteed for the entire period of time . If you find a company that does not provide this guarantee , then I would shop around . Talk to your agent . After the term , the policy goes into what is referred to as annual renewable which can give you continued coverage however the rates are no longer guaranteed . Whole Life Insurance is permanent insurance designed to provide death benefit coverage until you die , your entire life , whether that is tomorrow or at age 105 . Not all companies are the same so be sure to do some homework . Whole Life Insurance is the oldest type of Life Insurance available and is usually the most expensive . Whole Life guarantees the premium you pay as well as the cash value you will have at a given time . Whole Life -LRB- WL -RRB- , a true WL policy pays dividends which can go back into the policy for more death benefit & cash value are pay you direct . There are usually several add-on 's or riders you can add to the policy to increase your coverage , add a child or spouse and on . Depending on what you are trying to achieve with the Life Insurance , both Term Life & Whole Life may be the answer . I would recommend talking to your agent/broker to help you decide how each of these will fit .
Do you really want to do business with a company you personally never heard of and have to ask about ? Or would you be safer and rather do business with a company that is America 's Oldest , Largest , and Highest Rated Life Insurer ? New York Life has been providing Life Insurance to Americans for about 160 years ! Please call me and I can answer your questions about the great advantages of New York Life Insurance . Is n't that what you want for your family ?
Who has `` good '' life insurance is a smarter question than most people will ask ! Of course what qualifies as `` good '' is relative . If a person is uninsurable by most provider 's standards and they are able to find a company that will insure them - that probably would qualify as `` good '' insurance ! Over all , for most people I would answer that the best insurance companies are the Mutual companies that pay dividends to their policy holders . Financial information is public information so it can be verified by simple research . There are independent rating companies such as Moody 's , Standard & Poor , Fitch , AM Best and Comdex . They rate insurance companies on their financial strength , their history of paying claims , length of time in business , etc. . New York Life is one of the oldest , financially strongest and with an unmatched track record of paying dividends . It also receives the highest ratings from all the rating companies . Their permanent life products are very competitively priced and pay higher cash values than most .
Indemnity Health Insurance is one of the oldest types of coverage and was created long before HMO and PPO began to muddy the waters . This is one of those `` insurances '' you better understand what you are buying and compare the `` premiums '' to the benefit of your having the discipline to take those same dollars down to the bank and save the money rather than paying some insurance company for little or nothing . You need to understand how long it is before the insurance company will start paying the benefits even if you have a claim . You better understand in order to collect anything on these policies you must be `` hospitalized '' and then the benefit days are very limited . Millions are poured into these policies every year by gullible individuals that do not even understand what they bought
Whole Life Insurance is the oldest type of insurance within the family of life insurance . Whole Life Insurance is full of guarantees which other policies do mot have . These guarantees include the death benefit , the premium you pay for coverage and the cash value in any given year . Other popular features include dividends which can be paid to you or back into the policy , paid up insurance , additional life insurance by adding inexpensive term riders . And more depending on the company . Company specific additions may include a critical illness rider , disability protection for accident only or accident and health .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
Evaluating an insurance company includes looking at their financial history , how swiftly they pay their claims , their financial ratings and reputation , years in business . New York Life is America 's oldest and largest life insurance company , with the highest financial ratings from all bureaus and the quickest pay history . Check our reputation . We are the company you keep .
I am happy to report that New York Life is America 's oldest and largest Mutual Life Insurance Company in America . Being a Mutual Life Insurer , means there are no stockholders to try to please . The Owners are the Policy Holders . This can mean substantial savings for Policy Holders of a Mutual Life Insurer like New York Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 .
New York Life is America 's Oldest , Largest , and Highest Rated Life Insurance Company . More than 165 years in business , and a Mutual Company , so they work for their policy holders , not stock holders . They offer both Whole Life and Term Life Policies .
Life insurance companies is one of the oldest types of insurance polices . Itis a product that can protect a loved one or company from a sudden death of an important person whose skills of earning an income or value to a business for financial devastation . Statistically speaking it can also be one of the most profitable insurance plans to an insurance company if they manage their risk very well . From a consumer stand point it is the only type of life insurance policy that is guaranteed to pay a claim , as we are all guaranteed to die someday .
That is a wide open question . Pricing varies depending on age , health , line of work and activities . You need a Life Insurance Agent you can trust and a company you can trust . New York Life is the oldest , largest , highest rated Life Insurance Company in America .
Whole Life Insurance is the oldest kind of insurance around . The attraction to Whole Life Insurance are the guarantees associated with it . Not only do you get the death benefit guaranteed , but the cash value in future years is guaranteed as well with the opportunity to grow even more . Because of these guarantees , there is a cost for this which is why it is more expensive however you do get what you pay for . Whole Life policies are pretty solid , pay dividends which you can take as cash or put back into the policy to provide a larger benefit later .
I believe that answer is a firm New York Life . New York Life is America 's Oldest , Largest , Most Reliable , has the Universally Highest Ratings from Every Single One of the Financial Rating Services . They even declared an increased 8 % Dividend to their Policy Owners last week . They are the quickest to pay on Claims , usually within 7 days . Is n't that what you want for your family ?
Term covers you for the period you sign up for , so long as you continue to pay it . It builds no equity , and is like renting a home rather than buying . It is good for starting out but you want to try to build to Whole Life if you possibly can . Even a little of both would be better , but remember , some life insurance , either Term or Whole is better than none . I would love to discuss your options with you . New York Life , America 's oldest , largest and highest rated life insurer has a large variety of life policies , and has recently reduced the pricing on its term life policies .
Why is Whole Life insurance good ? Ah - where to begin ? There are so many good things about Whole Life ! I like the points Larry made above here , and the points that DM Rozek made . So rather than restate those points I 'll start by saying that your best Whole Life policies are with the strongest , oldest , Mutual insurance companies that pay dividends to the policy holders . There is no cash value at all with Term insurance so that 's a definite advantage of Whole Life . Beyond the other points mentioned above by the other contributors , what I like to help my clients understand is the `` infinite banking '' uses , or the `` interest arbitrage '' strategies that Whole Life insurance makes possible . The cash value of Whole Life is a liquid asset that can be used without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . The interest on policy loans is almost always lower than the interest and dividends paid into policy cash value . And when you have a policy with a mutual company that offers non-direct recognition loans your cash value continues to accumulate compounded as though the loan was never taken . And when borrowing from your cash value yo are n't locked into a repayment schedule as you are with a bank .
Of course you should , but what about that cost ? It is high for most , but there is a way to get it for free ! Yes free . There is a life insurance policy that provides living benefits for disability , chronic care and terminal care , absolutely FREE . It is from America 's second oldest insurance company . I would love to discuss this new policy with anyone , anywhere . Love to hear from you and to assist you with all the details . You no longer have to pay for that expensive long term care policy , yet feel protected with your own live insurance with these living benefits . Thank you . Gary Lane . 7144229616 .
New York Life Insurance Company is one of the oldest carriers in the US . Since 1845 , they have been offering life insurance coverage to consumers . They are one of the largest insurers and offer a wide array of financial products for individuals , families and businesses . How do you view rates and purchase coverage ? Through a full-time broker and/or their website . The best resource for information is an agent/broker that is experienced and specializes in insurance sales .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Factors Affect Life Insurance Premiums ?
Life insurance premiums are affected by : age , gender , health class , amount of insurance , length of coverage , and riders . Health class is usually subdivided into smoker or nonsmoker and rating such as preferred plus , preferred , standard plus , and standard . Substandard is table 1 - 10 with 10 being the worse . The rating/health class is determined by build , family history and motor vehicle report . It is important to review your situation with a knowledgeable agent to make sure you apply with the best company for your unique circumstances .
Some factors that can affect life insurance premiums are your health , age , tobacco , weight , family health history , foreign travel to unsafe countries , dangerous hobbies , substance abuse , serious and/or numerous driving violations , felony , and results of exam -LRB- if exam is required -RRB- . With most of these factors , not just your current situation is considered , but they also look back some years . Having any of these risk factors does not necessarily mean your rate will be affected . Using an agent who carries multiple companies can help place you with the policy that has the best rates your unique profile .
The basic rate reflects your life expectancy . That rate describes a standard risk . Underwriters can modify the rate to reflect superior life expectancy down to inferior life expectancy . The next major consideration is how long the protection is going to last . The third consideration is how long are premiums to be paid .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
Sometimes applying for Life Insurance can slightly affect your Credit Score . Occasionally some companies will use Credit Score as a determining factor in your Premiums . And they will run your Credit Score to find out what it is . According to Experian `` Inquiries '' account for only 10 % of your Credit Score . And `` Excessive '' inquiries count against you . So unless you have had multiple recent inquiries , a single inquiry from an Insurance Company should not affect it too much according to Experian . However , I am a life insurance specialist , not a credit specialist . Experian , TransUnion , & Equifax all have some good info on their sites about what makes up your score and what can affect it .
Unfortunately there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to give a definitive answer as to what a term plan costs . The risk class is the most critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends ona number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- . Also affecting the premium for a policy is the type of policy you 're looking to secure - how much coverage do you want/need and for how long do you want/need it guaranteed for -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an independent insurance agent/broker to see what plans are available and what structure would be best suitable to meet your needs . You can send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like quotes and assistance with your and your family 's life insurance needs .
Unfortunately there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs.The risk class is the most critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends ona number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Also affecting the premium for a policy is the type of policy you 're looking to secure - how much coverage do you want/need and for how long do you want/need it guaranteed for -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an independent insurance agent/broker to see what plans are available and what structure would be best suitable to meet your needs . You can send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like quotes and assistance with your and your family 's life insurance needs .
It depends on a few different things . First , the type of vehicle will affect the policy premium . For example , a 2005 Toyota Corolla would typically have a lower premium than a 2005 Cadillac Escalade due to the cost difference in the vehicle and the cost difference in the repairs of the vehicle.Second , the driving record of the insured will affect the policy premium . For example , someone with one speeding ticket and an at fault accident will have a higher policy premium than someone with no speeding tickets or accidents . Thisis due to the fact that the insurance companieswill see that person witha ticket and accident as a greater risk to insure than the other person with a clean driving record . Third , the garaged location -LRB- home -RRB- of the vehicle will affect the policy premium . If you are garaging your vehicle in an area with a high rate of auto theft or vandalism the policy premium will be higher than in an area with a low rate of auto theft or vandalism . Again , this goes back to a greater risk for the insurance company . There are many more rating factors that the insurance companies use and they differ from state to state . Here in Arizona , for example , they will look at your credit score , occupation , and highest level of education in order to provide you with a price on coverage .
It 's very difficult to say what you should be paying for life insurance because it depends on a number of factors and we all have our own needs and budgets . There 's many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs . The risk class is the MOST critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of items including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Also affecting the premium for a policy is the type of policy you 're looking to secure - how much coverage do you want/need and for how long do you want/need it guaranteed for -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an experienced broker to see what programs are available and what structure would be most suitable to best serve your needs . We have in-depth knowledge of products from many different carriers and can help you through the entire process of securing life insurance from figuring out how much coverage you need and how long to placing the coverage in force and beyond . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are various factors that are included when an insurance company files pricing with a state 's Insurance Department . The obvious factors have to do with a driver 's record of accidents and infractions . Many companies have also determined that one 's credit standing can be a measurable factor when calculating the rate one would pay for car insurance . The car itself has a great deal to do with a policy 's pricing with regard to both Comprehensive and Collision , but Liability as well . Think of the kind of damage that can be caused by a large sized SUV vs a sub compact car . Finally , the coverage chosen directly affects the amount you pay . If two people live next to each other , own the very same make and model car , have a clean record and are insured by the same company , neighbor A is paying less because he is only carrying the state minimum requirement for liability coverage , while neighbor B is paying more because he has chosen the more complete protection offered by higher liabillity coverage limits . These are just a few examples of factors that affect the price you pay .
Life insurance for a 20 year old is typically going to feature very low rates assuming he/she is in decent health . Unfortunately , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs . The risk classification is the most critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- . Also affecting the premium for a policy is your age , how much coverage you want/need , and how long you want to guarantee it for -LRB- term or permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . It 's always advisable to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to determine what coverage is appropriate/suitable for your needs and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance for a 22 year old is typically going to feature very low rates assuming he/she is in decent health . Unfortunately , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs . The risk classification is the most critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Also affecting the premium for a policy is your age , how much coverage you want/need , and how long you want to guarantee it for -LRB- term or permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to determine what coverage is appropriate/suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
There are many factors that affect the policy premium pricing . Therefore , more questions than answers ... initially ... First of all , what State are we talking about , since rates vary greatly from State to State , not to mention significant regional variations within a State ? For one example , think of a coastal location exposure to wind vs. a dwelling located inland and not generally exposed to the same potential perils . Which one is going to present the highest chance of risk for wind damage losses ? This will definitely affect the premium . Additionally , one insurance company 's rates can vary greatly from those of another . Also , a few of the many other questions : What is the amount of intended insurance needed on the dwelling ? How old is the home ? What type of construction ? What type of fire protection and proximity to the dwelling ? What other types of protection devices and method of monitoring ? Any dangerous animal breeds ? Swimming pool ? You really need to talk to an agent about rates in your location . Ask for quotes from the strongest carriers . Ask particularly about their financial strengths and claims paying histories . Try to get carriers with A.M Best ratings of A or better , if at all possible . Additionally , many State Insurance Departments have consumer information for the public , relating to homeowner polices . Do some of your own ` on-line ' research , if possible . You can also ask other homeowners in your area about their carriers ' pricing and experiences with claims .
Unfortunately , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs.The risk classification is the most critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends ona number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Also affecting the premium for a policy is your age , how much coverage you want/need , and how long you want to guarantee it for -LRB- term or permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to determine what coverage is appropriate/suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Your homeowners insurance will more than likely go up if you have a pool on your property . Every carrier and policy are different . The factors that will affect your rate are the type of pool . Is it above ground or in ground ? How large is the pool ? Is there a locked gate and fence around the pool ? These are just a few of the factors that will possibly affect your premium . Contact your local agent to find out what effect a pool would have on your homeowners coverage .
Potentially it may never go down . Most insurance carriers will keep accidents and ticket on your rating record for three to five years . Your age will also affect your raate . Each carrier will set it 's own determination as to what age groups receive which rates . Many other factors can also affect your rates , i.e. geographic location , type of vehicle and many other factors .
Smoking affects life insurance rates but how much depends on other health and lifestyle factors . In general , the premium for term life insurance for people in their thirties and forties is three times more for tobacco users than for non tobacco users . The factor widens on older individuals . For permanent -LRB- cash value -RRB- policies the difference is not as great . The kind of smoking or tobacco use affects rates , too . In recent years , a few innovative insurance companies have been offering non tobacco rates to cigar smokers and users of smokeless tobacco making their tobacco class rates effectively cigarette user rates . Celebratory cigar use e.g. once or twice a year at weddings , may even qualify at such innovative insurance companies for preferred non tobacco premium rates .
Yes , smoking affects life insurance rates but how much depends on other health and lifestyle factors . In general , the premium for term life insurance for people in their thirties and forties is three times more for tobacco users than for non tobacco users . The factor widens on older individuals . The kind of smoking or tobacco use affects rates , too . In recent years , a few innovative insurance companies have been offering non tobacco rates to cigar smokers and users of smokeless tobacco making their tobacco class rates effectively cigarette user rates . Celebratory cigar use e.g. once or twice a year at weddings , may even qualify at such innovative insurance companies for preferred non tobacco premium rates .
If your question is what affects the stability of life insurance rates , the answer is , not very much . Life insurance rates are based on multiple millions of lives and death rates are predictable . A dramatic change in the financial markets could affect life insurance rates if the companies can not earn the necessary returns to maintain their promises . A dramatic epidemic could affect rates . Recently rates were affected by regulation . These changes are generally small .
The amount that someone should be paying for life insurance depends on a multitude of factors . Some of those factors are : 1 -RRB- The length of the policy . Generally speaking , the longer your premium is locked in , the higher your term life insurance premium will be . Also , permanent policies usually cost more than term policies . However , getting a new policy every 10 years can end up costing more than locking in one policy for 30 + years . So you have to look at the big picture and the purpose of your life insurance in order to determine which is more cost effective for you . 2 -RRB- Your age . Premiums go up with age . 3 -RRB- Your health and other risk factors . Having a health condition , family history of early heart disease , dangerous hobbies , and other risk factors can all affect the price of your life insurance . 4 -RRB- The type of policy you get . If you want to build up cash value in your policy -LRB- such as Whole Life or Indexed Universal Life -RRB- it will cost more than a Term policy that has no cash value . However , even policies of exactly the same type will vary in price depending on the carrier you buy them from or whether or not you get an exam -LRB- generally , but not always , No Exam policies cost more than those requiring full medical underwriting -RRB- . It is important to shop with an ethical broker who can find you the lowest price but also the type of policy that works best for your needs . 5 -RRB- Your financial situation . Persons with higher incomes and estate values may want to spend more on their life insurance coverage than those struggling to have a good quality of life on a low income . Insurance calculators can help you determine how much insurance you need , which will in turn help you arrive at an affordable price
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Medicare Supplemental Insurance Worth It ?
Medicare supplemental insurance can be a financial lifeline for most people . Medicare Part A and Part B only cover about 80 % of approved charges . This can leave you owing many thousands of dollars and there is no cap on your out of pocket . Medicare supplemental insurance plans allow you to decide how much risk you are willing to accept . The most popular plans will reduce your financial obligation to less than $ 500 per year .
Is Supplemental Disability Insurance worth it ? That is a great question . If you need almost all your income to support your family 's lifestyle and home , then it certainly could be worth it for you . Group Disability Insurance can end up paying you only 45 % of your income , after taxes , and has restrictive features that a Supplemental Disability Insurance policy will expand upon . Also , Supplemental Disability Insurance can bump the amount you would get paid during a disability to 70 % to 80 % of your income . Finally , Supplemental Disability Insurance is generally portable whereas group DI policies generally are not portable . So purchasing Supplemental Life Insurance while you are still insurable can ensure having Disability coverage for the rest of your life .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Is Life Insurance really worth it ? That depends entirely on the individual involved . For some the idea of protecting their family if they do n't make it home some night is worth a great deal . For others not so much , as it depends on your relationships in life . Even as single young man , I bought life insurance . Why ? cause it was `` worth '' it to me to make sure that my mom could deal with the clean up of the mess I left behind without having to spend the money she worked hard for herself . It was `` worth '' it to me to make a terrible situation that my mom might have to face not a financial hardship at the same time . Later on , it was `` worth '' it to me to have coverage for my wife and kids . This is really a personal answer for each person . I ca n't tell anybody why it 's worth it to them , that has to be their own choice .
Life insurance is worth having if you have family beneficiaries or business partners who need to be indemnified in the event of your demise , i.e. they would suffer economic loss . So its definitely worth having for their sakes . Additionally , a fully suppressed TAMRA compliant death benefit designed for a non-modified endowment life insurance policy can deliver tax advantaged income as a supplemental retirement plan . That may be worth having for yourself .
Medicare Supplements help pay the deductibles and copay 's of Medicare . Depending on the plan you choose you could have nearly 100 % of you covered medical expenses covered . Medicare was never designed to pay all of your Medical costs . If you get sick you could end up with thousands of dollars in out of pocket costs with just one trip to the hospital A good Medicare Supplement is worth the investment if you can afford the premium . If not then look at a good Medicare Advantage Plan .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How To Sign Up For Medigap ?
The best way to buy a Medigap plan is to do it through an independent broker who can compare multiple options to find you the desired plan at the lowest possible cost -LRB- brokers do not charge any fees for their services -RRB- - I can help you with this as my background is in senior life and health insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- . If you 're new to Medicare , you have a 6-month initial enrollment period where you can sign up for any Medigap plan from any carrier without any medical underwriting , meaning they are guaranteed issue . Give me a call and I will help you get your Medigap plan set up . Thanks very much .
Using an independent insurance agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is a great way to buy a plan . This type of agent can personally work with you to make sure you get the benefits you desire at a great price . If you are new to Medicare and still in your Initial Enrollment Period , you do not have to answer any health questions to purchase a policy . Once the Initial Enrollment Period Ends , you are required to answer medical questions with the insurance company . There are also situations where you may be in a Special Election Period and that would also mean you could buy a policy without going through Medical underwriting . A Medicare Supplement Specialist can help you with all these types of details . It 's our job to do all the work and let you simply decide which Plan you want to buy . It 's also our job to make sure we are checking in with you throughout the year and providing you with a rate review when your policy renews . That way we can make sure your premium is always in a good position . Thank you for taking the time to read my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you signed up for Medicare Part A & Part B during your initial enrollment period , then your effective date will be either the first of the month you turn 65 -LRB- this is the case for most individuals -RRB- or 2 or 3 months after -LRB- if you signed up after the month you turned 65 -RRB- . If you decided to wait because you were still working -LRB- e.g. on a group health plan through your employer -RRB- , then you may be eligible for a special enrollment period and set up an effective date for the first of the following month -LRB- you 'll likely need to complete the Part B enrollment at your local social security office -RRB- . If you decided to wait on signing up for Part B and do not have a special enrollment period , then you would be looking at signing up during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . If you 're signing up during this window , then your effective date would be July 1 .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B at the same time that you sign up for Medicare Part A , or you can wait to sign up for Part B until you have stopped working and no longer have group coverage . If you are receiving Social Security benefits , you will be signed up for Part A and B automatically just before your 65th birthday .
If you are age 65 and have begun receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare Part A and B . You can sign up for an Advantage Plan or get Medicare Part D -LRB- or other letters -RRB- at that time , as well . You sign up for Medicare by visiting your local Social Security office , going to Medicare.gov -LRB- where you will be directed to a website where you can sign up -RRB- , or calling 1-800-MEDICARE .
You can sign up for Medicare online at medicare.gov . If you are nearing age 65 , you can sign up in the three months before or after the month of your 65th birthday . If you would rather sign up by phone , you can call 1-800-MEDICARE -LRB- 1-800-633-4227 -RRB- . Or you can go to your local Social Security Office to sign up for Medicare .
Other than your initial enrollment period , Medigap does not have an open enrollment period . For most people , when they turn age 65 and sign up for Medicare Part B , their initial enrollment period starts . During that 6 month period you can sign up for any Medicare supplement plan without providing evidence of insurability . But you are allowed to buy or change your Medigap plan at any time of the year .
There is an `` open enrollment period '' during which you can buy any Medigap insurance policy -LRB- Plan F -RRB- sold in your state beginning the month in which you turn age 65 and you are enrolled in Medicare Part B . During this six month open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap insurance offered , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people in good health . If you apply for Medigap coverage after your open enrollment period , there 's no guarantee that an insurance company will sell you a Medigap policy if you dont meet the medical underwriting requirements , unless you 're eligible because you have group health insurance through an employer or union . If this is your situation , the Medigap enrollment period begins when you sign-up for Part B . There are some situations if you are under 65 and are eligible for Medicare because of a disability you could be eligible for Medigap coverage . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and are under 65 , some states require at least one type of Medigap policy to be offered to you .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B online at medicare.gov . The website offers information about when and how to apply , along with a form that you can fill in and submit online . If you would rather call to sign up , you can call Social Security at1-800-772-1213 . Or you can sign up at your local Social Security office .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
The best way to buy a Medigap plan is to do it through an independent broker who can compare multiple options to find you the desired plan at the lowest possible cost -LRB- brokers do not charge any fees for their services -RRB- - I can help you with this as my background is in senior life and health insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- . If you 're new to Medicare , you have a 6-month initial enrollment period where you can sign up for any Medigap plan from any carrier without any medical underwriting , meaning they are guaranteed issue . Give me a call and I will help you get your Medigap plan set up . Thanks very much .
People were first able to sign up for Medicare on July 1 , 1966 . President Johnson signed into law the Medicare Program on July 30 , 1965 . President Johnson enrolled former President Truman as the first person on Medicare at the bill-signing ceremony . Now there is original Medicare Part A & B plus people have the choice of a Medigap Plan -LRB- Medicare Supplement Plan -RRB- or a Medicare Advantage Plan .
The main way to qualify for Medicare is to be turning 65 year sold . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care .
One of the best ways to compare Medigap Plans is to look at the benefits side-by-side . Medigap Plans are standardized , so all the lettered plans have the exact same benefits with every insurance company . Choosing to work with an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance is a step in the right direction . The right agent will take the time to show you the different Medigap Plans and describe the pros and cons based on your individual needs . Here are some questions that you may want to ask yourself : Do you want to pay the annual Part B deductible ? -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Do you want to pay any co-pays or co-insurance ? Do you want all the Medicare approved charges covered so you do n't have to deal with deductibles , co-pays and co-insurance ? As I stated above , Medigap Plans are standardized -LRB- Plan G with ABC insurance company has the same exact benefits with XYZ insurance company -RRB- and the only difference is the price . Once you decide which benefits you want , your agent can shop the market for the best premium . But do n't let that be the end of the story . You will want to make sure the insurance agent helping you with this process is one that provides on-going service and annual rate reviews . Far too many times do I speak with Seniors who signed up for a Medigap plan with a great premium only to have it sky rocket years later ... never once did the original agent check in with them . Thank you for taking the time to read my response . If I can help you compare Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 or visit my website at www.remedigap.com .
Medicare Part D , where do I apply ? What is the doughnut hole and how does it work ? How much does Medicare Part D cost ? Can I sign up for Part D at any time ? Which plan is the best one for me ? All good questions . The answer to where do you apply is this . You can apply through Medicare.gov You can sign up direct through a carrier Or you can find a good local insurance agent that specializes in Medicare plans
Assuming you are not under 65 and disabled , you can apply any time you are at least 65 years old and enrolled in both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- original Medicare -RRB- . If you are on a Medicare Advantage Plan , you may not purchase a Medicare Supplement unless you switch back to original Medicare . The best time to `` sign up '' for a Medicare Supplement or `` Medigap '' policy is during your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , which lasts for 6 months and begins on the first day of the month your both 65 or older and enrolled in Medicare Part B . During your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , an insurance company can not use medical underwriting and can not rufue to sell you any Medigap policy it offers .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to the website medicare.gov . There is an online form that explains about Medicare Part B and allows you to sign up right there . Or you can visit your local Social Security office to sign up , or call Social Security at 1-800-633-4227 .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
For most people , Medicare starts the 1st day of the month you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part A & B which covers about 80 % of the costs of care . You can also sign up for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- to cover the difference . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is great health insurance . In addition , you can get a Medicare Part D plan to cover your prescription needs .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Often Will Medicare Pay For A CPAP Machine ?
If you qualify , Medicare will pay for the rental of a CPAP machine . You must have been seen by a doctor , and that doctor must have prescribed a sleep study . The study must be conducted by a Medicare approved facility and your diagnosis must be confirmed . You must have been trained on the care and use of a CPAP before Medicare will cover the rental .
Medicare will cover a three month trial for a Cpap machine for those on Medicare who are diagnosed with sleep apnea . It is covered under Medicare Part B . If the machine works to alleviate signs and symptoms of sleep apnea , Medicare may cover the Cpap machine rental for a longer period of time . Once you have rented the machine for 13 months , you own it .
I am having a hard time finding a definitive answer to this question . It appears that Medicare can replace a Cpap machine every 5 years , but it is not clear whether there has to be justification for it -LRB- i.e. a new model would more effectively treat the sleep apnea , etc -RRB- . If a Cpap machine is replaced , it is called a restart , and the machine is rented for the first year before becoming the property of the Cpap user .
If your doctor certifies that you have sleep apnea that can not be treated with other protocols and you need a cpap machine , Medicare will pay for the rental of a cpap machine . Your doctor must have documented a sleep study where your nightly sleep patterns were monitored . Medicare will cover a 90 day rental . After 90 days your doctor must recertify the need for the machine .
Yes , Medicare will cover Cpap supplies for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea . When first being evaluated , Medicare will pay for three months of Cpap usage and supplies on a trial basis . Once it it determined that obstructive sleep apnea is the cause of sleep symptoms , and that Cpap therapy works in alleviating those symptoms , Medicare will extend the coverage period for which they will pay for Cpap machine and supplies .
Medicare will cover Cpap therapy when medically necessary . If diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea , Medicare will pay for a three months trial of Cpap to see if it is effecting in treating the sleep apnea . If it is , Medicare will extend the coverage to 13 months , after which you will own the Cpap machine .
CPAP machines are used to treat some forms of sleep apnea . Before Medicare will authorize a CPAP your doctor must submit a CMN -LRB- certificate of medical need -RRB- . You must have had a sleep study conducted by a Medicare approved facility and you must have had training on the use and care of the CPAP .
If you have been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea , you can claim the Cpap rental as Medicare expense , if the Cpap therapy is found to be medically necessary for treatment of your sleep apnea . After 13 months of renting the Cpap machine , you normally will own the machine , but still can be reimbursed for Cpap supplies .
If you qualify , Medicare will pay for the rental of a CPAP machine . You must have been seen by a doctor , and that doctor must have prescribed a sleep study . The study must be conducted by a Medicare approved facility and your diagnosis must be confirmed . You must have been trained on the care and use of a CPAP before Medicare will cover the rental .
Medicare will cover treatment of sleep apnea , including a CPAP if justified as medically necessary . You must have been examined by a doctor and have a confirmed diagnosis of apnea . Your doctor must have prescribed a sleep test and the study must confirm the diagnosis . Medicare will pay for rental of a CPAP machine if you qualify .
Your health insurance plan will most likely cover a CPAP machine provided you meet the criteria of their guidelines . Every plan is different , but the process is similar . You must have had a consult with your PCP who refers you to a sleep study program . The results of your sleep study must be presented to your carrier along with a doctors diagnosis of sleep apnea and a recommendation for a CPAP
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I get life insurance if I have sleep apnea ? Well the answer is many times yes , but I need to know some answers to some questions . Are you using a CPAP machine , or a BiPAP machine , as well as what 's your height and weight , and have you used tobacco in the last 12 months ? I also need to know the date or age of first diagnosis , and whether the sleep apnea was diagnosed as obstructive , central , mixed , or unknown . As well as was the sleep apnea diagnosed as mild , moderate , or severe and then the date of the last sleep study that you have undergone . All these factors will be able to give us a great idea of which carrier to go to . Remember certain carriers are more benevolent with sleep apnea when it comes to pricing life insurance .
Medicare will cover the cost of renting a CPAP machine if there is a medical necessity . You must have been examined by a doctor , the doctor must have prescribed a sleep study and the study must have been diagnosed with sleep apnea . Your doctor must submit a CMN to Medicare .
For treatment of sleep apnea Medicare does require a CMN -LRB- certficate of medical need -RRB- form to be completed by your doctor . The patient must have seen a doctor prior to the sleep study test . The patient must have completed a Medicare approved sleep study test The patient must have had training fomr the CPAP provider on the use and care of the machine
Can you get life insurance with sleep apnea ? Yes , it is possible to obtain life coverage while having sleep apnea , but chances are the class will be standard or lower . Sleep apnea is an unpredictable outcome illness as it can be the begining of other serious coniditions . Someone with sleep apnea must show good control , consistent use of their c-pap machine -LRB- currently 50 % of the people stop using their cpap after one year . -RRB- and not have issues elsewhere .
Sleep apnea can affect life insurance ratings on premiums . The severity of the sleep apnea can effect coverage from a standard issue to a decline for coverage . The underwriters are more concerned with the symptoms associated with the sleep apnea . If it is causing high blood pressure , insomnia , depression , etc. and not controlled most carriers would decline . If it is controlled surgically or with a Cpap machine the rating would be minimal .
People who have been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea can be eligible for three months of CPAP -LRB- Continuous Positive Airway Pressure -RRB- if that is determined medically necessary . If the CPAP therapy is helpful , Medicare may extend the length of time that the machine rental and purchase of related supplies -LRB- mask , tubing -RRB- is covered .
A Table B or Table 2 life insurance rating is generally equal to the standard rating plus an additional 50 % premium . As a rule of thumb , each table a carrier adds to a standard rating is a 25 % increase in premium over the premium for a standard risk class . Some life insurance companies use different rating systems than others , but this is generally the industry standard . Every life insurance company has different underwriting , so while you may have been offered a Table B rating by one company , you might be able to get a better rate , including standard or even preferred , with another company . If you have been assigned/offered a Table B risk classification on your life insurance application , it is likely due to the one of the following : 1 -RRB- Elevated weight to height profile 2 -RRB- Abnormal blood pressure readings 3 -RRB- Abnormal cholesterol readings 4 -RRB- Abnormal lab results , including A1C hemoglobin levels or elevated liver functions 5 -RRB- Abnormal EKG reading 6 -RRB- Diabetes 7 -RRB- History of cancer 8 -RRB- History of heart issues or heart disease 9 -RRB- Sleep apnea , including use of a CPAP or Bi-PAP machine 10 -RRB- Other disease or disorder 11 -RRB- A combination of the above conditions You may be thinking at this point that it would be a good idea to just apply for another policy with a different company and the results are better next time . DO NOT DO THIS !!! Every time you apply for coverage , the result of the underwriting gets entered in to the Medical Information Bureau database . When a carrier sees you have applied for coverage with multiple carriers and they each offer you a table rating , the less likely your odds are to get a better offer because it 's sort of like a red flag to other carriers . Before applying with any other insurance companies , you need to consult with a life insurance broker who has a strong background in high risk life insurance . A broker can shop your case informally to determine which carrier will work best for your specific medical history . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Depending upon if your sleep apnea is mild and controlled , not severe and uncontrolled , you should be able to secure life insurance coverage at standard offers or better . Some sleep apnea can be corrected with surgery and some life insurance companies are benevolent because it was corrected . The real problem is diagnosed uncontrolled sleep apnea with no Cpap machine , that can cause dramatically affect an underwriting offer or outright declination .
Medicare does not normally pay for a blood pressure machine . Two exceptions are if you are suspected to have `` white coat syndrome '' where your blood pressure goes up when taken by a health care professional . Then Medicare may pay for an ambulatory blood pressure monitoring device that takes your blood pressure periodically over a 24 hour period . Or if you are on dialysis in your home , Medicare will pay for your blood pressure monitor and stethoscope .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Flood ?
Flood is one of the leading causes of property loss in the United States . The problem is so great that the Federal Government has a program to provide that coverage . Private insurers , normally exclude damage caused by water entering the residence from the outside and in particular by flood . Your current insurance agent can probably give you specific information about the flood program in your area .
Renters insurance will not cover flood damage . Neither will homeowners insurance . Flood insurance is a completely separate policy that is regulated by the federal government . Flood policies can be a little pricey . Depending on you geographic location if you are a homeowner you may be required by your lending institution to carry flood insurance . Renters on the other hand would not be required to carry such coverage unless specified by the rental agreement .
To have flood covered by any type of renters or homeowners coverage , you must have a special flood policy . Your homeowners and renters will cover water damage due to sewer backup , burst pipes , or rain damage from a leaking roof , it will not cover flood . There is a special Federal Flood Insurance program you can look in to if you live in a flood zone .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
To have flood covered by any type of renters or homeowners coverage , you must have a special flood policy . Your homeowners and renters will cover water damage due to sewer backup , burst pipes , or rain damage from a leaking roof , it will not cover flood . There is a special Federal Flood Insurance program you can look in to if you live in a flood zone .
State Farm renter 's insurance does not cover flood . In fact , no renter 's insurance policy covers flood since it must be purchased separately . It is a specific risk that has been handled by a government agency in the past . If you are in a flood zone or are at risk for flood damage , you can speak to a broker about rates and policy information .
Standard renters ' insurance does not cover damage to property from flooding . A separate flood policy is available through most insurance agencies , as part of the Federal flood program . Usually , the coverage that is most important to the renter is for contents that could possibly be damaged as a result of flooding .
Flood damage is excluded on just about every home , condo and renters policy . In order to have coverage for flood damage you need flood insurance which is a separate policy . The cost for flood insurance depends on your area and flood zone . FEMA regulates flood insurance so rates are the same with all companies who service flood insurance .
Your renters coverage will cover your possessions if the water damage is from a covered peril such as a broken pipe , but will not cover you from damage due to a flood from rising waters . In order to be covered for damage from a flood , you will need to purchase a renters flood policy .
Renters insurance will not cover flood damage . Neither will homeowners insurance . Flood insurance is a completely separate policy that is regulated by the federal government . Flood policies can be a little pricey . Depending on you geographic location if you are a homeowner you may be required by your lending institution to carry flood insurance . Renters on the other hand would not be required to carry such coverage unless specified by the rental agreement .
Renters insurance -LRB- and Homeowners Insurance -RRB- does not cover flood . It will cover water damage due to sewer backup if the appropriate endorsement is in place . It may also cover water damage due to pipe breakage depending on the cause of the break . If you live in a flood zone you need to look into your State Flood Insurance program .
Flood insurance or coverage for a flood is not included in a homeowners insurance policy and is in fact specifically excluded . There is only one option for flood protection and that is to purchase a flood policy . Almost all insurance companies can write you a flood policy but the policy is underwritten though FEMA . Which ever insurance company you currently work with on your homeowners insurance should be able to set you up with a flood policy . Unless there is a close of escrow you have a 30 day wait before a flood policy can become active so no waiting until the storm hits to purchase a flood policy . Flood is not to be mixed up with water damage which is covered under a homeowners policy . An example of water damage would be a pipe that burst in the home .
I used to be an Allstate agent , but it does n't matter where you purchase your Renter 's policy . Flood is exluded on the policy . Butif you have water damage from a pipe breaking or the toilet over flowing , those type of water damages would be covered.If you areworried about flood , you can buy flood insurance even if you dont ' liive in a flood zone and even if you rent .
Renters insurance will not cover flood damage . Some renters policies may offer sump pump and sewer back up coverage at an additional cost . Flood insurance is sold separately and requires an agent be licensed to sell it . If you feel you need flood insurance coverage I would suggest contacting your local agent and discussing it with them .
Flood insurance is handled through the Federal government only and sold through insurance carriers . Renters insurance as well as homeowners insurance does not cover flood damage of any kind . You must purchase flood insurance as a seperate policy . Contact a local agent to find out availabity for this coverage within your area .
The property coverage you are afforded under renter 's coverage is for your personal property -LRB- furniture , tv , audio systems , clothes , dishes , etc -RRB- , but typically not for the building . If you are asking if your own personal property would be covered if a hurricane caused the damaged , then , yes , your personal property would be covered . However , there is one caveat ... if it was wind that was determined as the cause of loss . Hurricanes can cause damage not only by wind , but by flooding . If flooding -LRB- waters rising from outside -RRB- was the cause of loss , you may not be covered , because flood is typically excluded . You could possibly purchase flood coverage in this case .
Niether homeowners or renters insurnace will cover flood damage under normal circumstances . To get flood insurance coverage it must be purchased from a carrier that is appointed bye the federal government . Only select carriers provide flood insurance coverage and agents must be appointed with one of those carriers to be able to sell flood insurance coverage .
Homeowners policies contain a specific exclusion for the peril `` Flood '' . Flood is defined as , `` A flood is a general and temporary condition where two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties are inundated by water or mudflow . '' Maybe people confuse `` flood '' as a peril as compared to `` flooding '' of a basement or floor . If , for example , a pipe were to burst and `` flood '' the basement that would be a covered loss under a Standard HO-3 Homeowners Insurance Policy . It would cover the damage to the dwelling and your contents but not the cost to replace the pipe itself . Hope this helps
Generally speaking NO ... virtually all carriers who use any part of an ISO homeowners insurance contract will exclude flood . Flood insurance is underwritten and priced by the government through FEMA . There are several carriers who write flood insurance and there should n't be any real variance to the pricing between the carriers . Even if you do n't think your home or business would ever flood , check out the cost of flood insurance . You might be surprised how cheap it actually is ... I know what I 'm talking about on this topic . My office had 7 feet of water in it after back to back 100 years storms hit my area back in 2010 . I did n't have flood insurance -LRB- dumb agent I know -RRB- and had to come out of pocket to rebuild my unit . I have flood insurance now ... costs me about $ 350 a year !!
Flood damage is normally an excluded peril in a Renters policy . Separate flood insurance is available through independent companies or through the Federal governments flood insurance program . The Landlord is likely not responsible for flood damage to your personal property .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Money From Disability Insurance Taxable ?
This is one of the most popular questions that I get asked so here is my answer : If you paid all of the premiums with after-tax income , or if your employer made the contributions and included the amounts in your gross income , any disability insurance benefits paid to you are exempt from tax .
Disability insurance benefit proceeds can have two outcomes when inserting taxation or the lack thereof into the planning equation . You can insure up to 60 % of your compensation tax free with nondeductible premiums or insure up to 80 % of your compensation taxable with deductible premiums through a business benefit arrangement .
Disability insurance you purchase without the financial contribution of your employer towards the premium expense of individual disability insurance will generally be free of income taxation . This tax treatment results from the circumstances . First , the money used to pay premiums are `` after-tax '' dollars . In other words , you already paid tax on the money used to pay the disability premiums when it was earned as income . Second , neither an employer or business will take a deduction on their tax returns for the payments made to provide the insurance to you . These two things make the income earned under a personal , individual disability policy free of income tax on the benefits . As a general rule , if a business pays for the a portion of the premium the benefit is probably taxable to some extent even when you contribute . The amount of the benefit that is taxable will be determined by the ratio of the total premium paid , compared against the premium amounts paid by the business and the individual . If the benefit is payable to a business the income is probably taxable . Corporate -LRB- or business -RRB- owned disability insurance can be designed to provide income or overhead expense protection . Overhead expense protection permits the deduction of cost on tax forms but the income is taxable . There is also the possibility that disability income coverage is used in a buy-sell agreement . When the benefit is paid to a business , as a general rule , the benefit is taxable . As in most instances , this general answer can not begin to address the variety of complicating circumstances so specific answers are best for specific situations .
In Canada , it is usually recommended that employees pay for their own group disability insurance . The reason is that if the employer pays for that portion of the group premium then the benefit -LRB- disability income -RRB- is taxable to the employee . The usual scenario has the employer and employee each paying 50 % of the total group premium . Under certain circumstances . it possible to structure individual policies where the company pays for the entire premium and deducts it as an expense . In this case the benefit -LRB- disability income -RRB- is taxable to the employee should he/she become disabled . The amount of income they could qualify for is increased to recognize the income would be taxable . The payment of the premium is not considered to be taxable benefit since the disability income is taxable . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Disability Insurance will qualify for a business expense if the business pays for the policy and does not receive any of the benefit received . However the employee of the business will need to report any disability income benefits received as taxable income . The same holds true if a professional such as a physician or dentist is incorporated and has a salary or wage continuation plan in the corporate minutes . The corporation may pay for the policy but any benefits received are taxable as income . How premiums for coverage can be changed from year to year . For individual disability policies , in the event of a claim , whether benefits are taxed or not depends on how the premiums were paid during the year of claim . For group disability polices there is a three year look back for premiums . Overhead/practice expense disability policies are always tax deductible and benefits received by the business/practice are not taxable .
When taking money from a Life Insurance Policy you need to consider the impact on your policy when you take a withdrawal or a loan . Both are available within your policy providing you have the cash value available . A withdrawal is taking money out of the cash value , with no intention of putting it back into the policy . The death benefit will be reduced in most cases as well as the remaining cash value . As long as the withdrawal is less than the money you have paid into the policy , there should not be a taxable event . If you do exceed the money you have paid in , then you will have to pay taxes on the amount over . On the other hand , a loan is a great option especially if you want to pay back the money taken . Look at your policy to understand the loan provisions . There is a fixed rate and most likely a variable rate . Depending how the policy credits money , and what the expected future growth might be , will determine which loan option may work best . Sometimes clients will take a withdrawal up to the cost basis , the premium you have paid in , then switch to a loan to minimize any tax burden . Like mentioned on the other comments , if you have a loan and the policy lapses , you will a potential taxable event which at the end of the current tax year , you will get the appropriate statement/form from the insurance company . Please consult your agent/broker prior to making any decisions .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
The Cash Value on Life Insurance is only going to be taxable in certain situations . First , you have to withdraw the cash value . If you leave it in the policy , it will grow tax-free . Second , if you take Cash Value out as a loan , and as long as the policy does not lapse , the money will remain tax-free . Third , if you withdraw the Cash Value , and the money you take out is greater then the money you have paid in , then the difference will be taxable . Or if the policy lapses with an outstanding loan , then this will create a taxable event .
The growth on an IRA , any IRA is not taxable during the accumulation period . If proceeds are taken from the plan following age 59.5 , the earnings on the Roth IRA plan are not taxable , nor is the distribution of the money invested in the plan taxable . If you have a conventional IRA , the entire amount withdrawn after age 59.5 is taxable . Withdrawal prior to 59.5 can incur a tax penalty .
The cash surrender value in life insurance is only taxable on the amount over your basis . Let me explain . Basis is considered the premium you paid in . For example , lets say over 20 years , you paid $ 1000 per year , totaling $ 20k . In this example , the cash value is $ 35k . The taxable amount is going to be what you have earned over the $ 20k you put in so $ 15,000 in this example is taxable . Consider however not surrendering this policy but taking loans out instead . Loans are not taxable , do not have to be paid back although I would recommend doing so in many situations , and as long as you pay the premiums on the policy to keep it in force , you will have no tax concerns . The Key here is NOT to let the policy lapse . Otherwise you may have a taxable event if the money you took out as a loan is greater that your basis . Contact your agent or reach out to me if you would like to learn why I would recommend you pay yourself back on the loan . Good Luck .
In Canada , if you personally pay the premium of an individual or group disability insurance then the benefit is tax free . If the company pays the premiums then the disability benefit would be taxable . In some corporate situations it is possible to structure individual policies so that the company deducts the premium and it is not considered a taxable benefit to the employee . However , if the employee is disabled the benefit are taxable . To offset the disability benefit being the amount you are allowed to qualify for based on your income is increased . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Whether a `` Life Insurance check '' is taxable depends on what kind of life insurance check it is . You did n't say if it was the death benefit proceeds , or if it was a cash withdrawal from the policy , or if it was a loan against the cash value of the policy . The payment of the death benefit to the beneficiary is NOT taxable . A check for a LOAN against the cash value is NOT taxable . However if you surrender the policy for the cash value or if you do a partial surrender for cash , if you receive more money than you have paid in , -LRB- cash basis of the policy -RRB- , then the amount in excess of premiums paid in WILL be taxable as ordinary income .
In general , yes , the life insurance death benefit is income tax-free -LRB- IRC Section 101 -LRB- a -RRB- -RRB- . But , there are situations where this benefit may be lost . If too much premium is paid into the policy in violation of Section 7702 of the IRC , the policy is no longer considered life insurance , and the death benefit is income taxable . Insurance companies monitor this and usually take action to prevent such violations . Insurance professionals worry more about the following more common situations where the death benefit can be taxable since the burden is on the policy owner to monitor and violations are usually not caught before it is too late . 1 . Since 2006 , new rules apply to life insurance in a business context which subjects the life insurance death benefit to income tax . If the policy does not meet the special requirements of Section 101 -LRB- j -RRB- such as the notice and consent or protected class requirementsthe death benefit may be income taxable . There is also an annual IRS reporting requirement -LRB- Form 8925 -RRB- . We find most small business owners are not aware , especially of the latter requirement . Most tax professionals are usually not aware either . This is a common and growing problem which generally can not be corrected -LRB- except to cancel policies and start over -RRB- . 2 . Three parties to a policy -LRB- aka Goodman triangle -RRB- : If a third-party owner names a different third-party beneficiary of a life contract , the proceeds may be income taxable or gift taxable . 3 . If the policy falls within the transfer-for-value rule and does not qualify for a safe-harbor exception , its death benefit is income taxable . Business owners should meet with a life insurance professional who can perform a comprehensive policy review and can coordinate with your tax and legal advisors . These comments are for planning purposes only and are not tax or legal advice .
That is a great question ! A tax deferred annuity is a great way to helpfund a retirement plan . In this type of vehicle , the money that you put into the annuity grows steadily . The interest that it earns stays in the annuity , and is n't counted yearly as income , so is n't taxable . Once the point comes when you start taking payments from it however , that earned interest becomes taxable , and is counted as income . Everything in the annuity over the amount that you started with is considered taxable income and you will count the interest on your taxes each year that you receive payments . The idea behind this strategy is that once you 've retired , you 've dropped in your yearly earnings , and thus into a lower tax bracket , and yet again saved money . If you would like more detail on this financial tool , please contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
A Roth IRA isnt better . A Roth IRA is different . Contributions for a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- reduce your current income tax . Contributions to a Roth IRA do not . Distributions from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are fully taxable as ordinary income . Distributions from a Roth IRA are not taxable at all . The limits to how much you can put into a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are quite generous . The limits to contributions to a Roth IRA are restrictive . There are taxes and possible penalties if you withdraw money from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- prior to age 59.5 . You can withdraw from the capital invested from a Roth IRA without tax consequences . There are advantages to both .
How much disability insurance is needed ? The answer is going to vary by individual . Some consider disability income sufficient if it replaces 70 % of your taxable income , since often individual disability is tax free . You might need a greater amount if your insurance is taxable income . You also may need to look at inflation protection with your plan . But honestly , what ever you can afford and keep in-force is what you should consider as a minimum . Some income is better than no income and disability coverage should not be looked at as a all or nothing choice .
Whether your employer provided disability insurance is taxable depends on who pays the premium , among some other things . If you pay the premiums for your policy with earnings that have already been taxed , your disability benefits should be tax free if/when collected . If your employer pays the policy premium and does not count that as income to you , then the disability benefits would be taxable . Whether you split premiums , use a cafeteria plan , or other factors , taxation has its own rules for each situation . But the above is the most common rule of thumb for employer provided disability insurance taxation .
The wording suggests the question concerns income tax reporting . Life insurance death benefit proceeds are usually exempt from income tax . There are exceptions . In some cases where a policy is owned by the insured 's employer , the proceeds may be taxable income . The proceeds may also be taxable if the policy -LRB- ordeath benefit -RRB- was sold or otherwise transferred in exchange for valuable consideration . If a policy is owned by a qualified plan , the death benefit will not be taxable when paid to the plan but would be taxable to the plan beneficiary when withdrawn .
Can you borrow money from your retirement plan ? Well , it 's going to depend on what type of plan you have . Some plans do allow for the request of borrowing from your account , but should you ? There are considerations to be made if this is something you are thinking about are issues like removing money from your account that could be earning a greater return than the rate you 're borrowing from . In other words you 're taking out money earning 8 % and paying it back at 4 % . Also if you separate employment the loan becomes a distribution and is considered taxable income with a possible early withdraw penalty .
That is a great question ! The answer depends upon how your annuity is structured , but the short answer is that a good portion of it is taxable . If your annuity is rolled into a retirement plan that was a pre-tax deduction , then whatever you draw from it is taxable . If it is one that you purchased for yourself and paid for post-tax , then the amount that the annuity earned in interest is taxable . Your annuity may pay out all the interest first , -LRB- which is taxed at whatever tax rate you are in at the time -RRB- until you hit the non-taxable amount you 'd invested into it , or it may pay a portion of both , and tax you upon the interest portion of that payout . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Does Social Security Fit Into My Retirement Plan ?
Social Security is a critical component in your retirement plan . The provisional income test for Social Security benefit taxation includes qualified plan distributions and income from other sources . Retirement planning is an art . Cash flow after tax is the monthly name of the game for seniors . If you can you should work until age 70 , delay taking your Social Security until age 70 and your required minimum distributions until 70 .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
Deferring your Social Security benefit will increase your monthly benefit . A worker can start receiving their benefit as early as age 62 . Almost half of all workers elect this early date for a variety of reasons . However , the Social Security Administration increases the benefit each year that you defer by about 8 percent . Since benefits are payable for life for many people this delay will result in substantially increasing their total benefit . Your Social Security benefits are particularly valuable . For many the decision to defer benefits is the most important retirement income decision than will make . Almost two-thirds of retirees receive over half of their income from Social Security . Most retirees depend upon Social Security . The Social Security benefit is guaranteed and inflation adjusted . Having a high inflation adjusted benefit is important . Inflation is a major issue in retirement . It is payable to a worker and a spouse should the worker die . Retirees fret over loss of principle and low rate of return , however , inflation is the real enemy . Fixed income people often call me in distress because of an increase in their expenses that isnt matched with an increase in income . Social Security adjusts the benefit annually in accordance with the Consumer Price Index . The decision to defer impacts married couples the most . For married couples the higher of the two Social Security benefits is paid after the death of the first spouse to the surviving spouse . Because many retirees do not have guaranteed lifetime income deferring is the easiest way to increase that guaranteed income . With increased income comes greater satisfaction in retirement . Because the Social Security benefit is automatically adjusted for inflation it is very important to have the benefit set as high as possible to make the most of those adjustments . In fact that type of protection can rarely be purchased on the commercial market . This critical decision is not difficult to evaluate and implement . Once it is understood , deferring Social Security is really an easy strategy to implement . The easiest way to go about this is to just continue working . The worker doesnt need to remain in their current job but full or part time work that you love and that provides all or most of your income needs makes delaying Social Security quite simple . If married workers are both eligible for workers benefits under Social Security there are strategies that capitalize on the start dates . A retirement income specialist can help you work the math on this procedure but implementing this properly can result in a dramatic increase in Social Security benefits . The Social Security Administration also provides calculators on their website to help evaluate some of these approaches . There are misconceptions concerning deferral of Social Security benefits . As workers approach their eligibility dates they are sometimes distracted by a few things . The first thing is an understanding that their last day at work should be the same as their first day on Social Security . It is quite possible that that is neither true nor beneficial . The day that you stop work doesnt need to have any bearing on the date you start receiving benefits . Another misconception is that if a worker doesnt start benefits as early as possible they might lose out when Social Security fails . It is unlikely that Social Security will fail and to file early might result in the worker actually getting less . Some workers gamble that they will not live to normal life expectancy -LRB- which is the basis for most social security calculations . -RRB- That is an extremely poor gamble since losing puts you in a lower income for an even longer time if you live past life expectancy . Another consideration is that your spousal benefit will be much less should you die before your spouse . While most of the time the worker that defers gets a better deal and the spouse of that worker gets an increased benefit if they survive the worker , there are situations where not deferring the benefit is the best strategy . The time when that is always true is when the worker reaches 70 . There arent any increases available after 70 . Another situation where not deferring benefits would work to the advantage of the participant is when the worker is single and has a much less than expected life expectancy due to illness or injury . IF you arent in those categories you should at least weigh the advantages should you defer receiving benefits .
Hopefully , it will not fit in too much . Each year we hear about Social Security drying up as people are living longer and drawing benefits longer . Keep in mind that Social Security will not affect what you get from your pension , profit sharing , savings and other assets you have to draw from upon your retirement . Its just that the benefits are drawing up for people like you and me who will be retiring in the future . You should contact the Social Security office and get a printout of what you anticipated benefits will be so that you can budget . This will help you better plan your retirement .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . If you arent yet 65 , you might also qualify for coverage if you have a disability or with End-Stage Renal disease -LRB- permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant -RRB- . Here are some simple guidelines . You can get Part A at age 65 without having to pay premiums if : You already get retirement benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . You are eligible to get Social Security or Railroad benefits but have n't yet filed for them . You or your spouse had Medicare-covered government employment . If you are under 65 , you can get Part A without having to pay premiums if you have : Received Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board disability benefits for 24 months . End-Stage Renal Disease and meet certain requirements . While you do not have to pay a premium for Part A if you meet one of these conditions , you must pay for Part B if you want it . The Part B monthly premium in 2013 is $ 104.90 per month . It is deducted from your Social Security , Railroad Retirement , or Civil Service Retirement check . If you dont get any of the above payments , Medicare sends you a bill for your Part B premium every 3 months . Note : You will be eligible for Medicare when you turn 65 even if you are not eligible for Social Security retirement benefits .
Retirement , Survivors , and Disability Insurance is a reference to three of the benefits that Social Security pays to those who have paid into Social Security taxes . The `` retirement '' part refers to Social Security income that people get when they retire . the `` survivors '' part refers to the Social Security income benefits paid to dependents of a qualified deceased person . And the `` disability '' part refers to Social Security Disability benefits disabled persons receive if they are qualified .
Social Security is affected by income you receive during retirement . There are ways to maximize your retirement income looking at when to draw on your Social Security versus using your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . What really comes into question is how is the taxation of your retirement funds going to cut into your potential income . Working with a professional who has specific knowledge in the Social Security Income system is a must . First I would recommend going to the Social Security website , set up a free account for yourself , and see what your estimated benefit is going to be . From there you can plan the best way to start using your retirement monies , keeping the tax liability to a minimum and to maximize the potential income you have available .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
You can apply online with the Social Security Administration for Medicare Part B benefits . The website for Social Security is www.SSA.gov . You can also visit your local Social Security office in person . When you activate your Medicare Part B it triggers an open enrollment period where you can apply for any Medicare Supplement Plan and not have to pass any medical underwriting . An Independent Medicare Insurance agent will be able to show you what 's available and help match a plan that fits your needs . There is a lot more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement Insurance on our website .
Most people in the USA have a retirement plan . It is called Social Security . The question is , will my social security benefit be adequate to meet my lifetime needs . For an amazing number of people the answer is , yes because that is all that they have . If you think you might need more money than that , then start talking with a retirement income certified professional . Get a plan and enjoy your retirement .
Seriously ? If you are Warren Buffet or Bill Gates or some other super rich person then you probably have no realistic reason to save for retirement . If , however , you are like the 99 % of other people in the world then unless your plan is to commit suicide after your last day at work you need to be thinking about how you are going to afford to live for the years and perhaps decades after you stop working . Social Security retirement benefits are highly unlikely to come close to replacing your income during your working years and Social Security was never intended to be a person 's sole source of retirement income . In addition , the financial viability of Social Security itself is being seriously questioned so it may not be there in the amount you would have expected and in the worst case scenario may not be there for you at all . For this reason a person needs to be saving money and investing it over the course of their working life in order to build up a financial nest egg for their retirement years . When you retire from your job your working income will cease , your expenses will not .
The social security number is a necessary method of identifying you and your record . Most insurers use this number to zero in on your identity . Unfortunately , your social security number is used to identify you and your record to insurance carriers , and just about every other kind of business that is granting credit or coverage . Would n't it be nice to be able to protect this one vital bit of information and have another identifying number we could use ? But I digress ... But , as identifiers go , the social security number is probably the best current way for your creditors and insurance companies to make sure you are really you . Insurance is making a bigger and bigger use of credit base underwriting and pricing every year and most carriers use credit to one extent or another in insurance eligibility and pricing . Companies are also using vast data base records of claims and driving history that are often cataloged by your address , your name , your spouse , former addresses , and even the prior owners and subsequent owners of cars you have once owned and insured . With all the potential for confusion , your social security number is one unique bit of information that is n't easily duplicated in these claims and records databases . So , in that one way , your social security number helps keep you from being lumped together with others who may have a similar name , owned your car , or lived in the same house or apartment . Your social security number has been tied to credit reports and your borrowing for decades so insurance companies use this number to be as certain as possible they are looking at your record and not someone with a similar name . While the social security number has now been exploited for way to many reasons of identification , it is good that you still have one way to separate yourself from others with similarities that can cause confusion in underwriting and pricing your insurance and that is a good thing . Hope this helps .
We get this question a lot here at The Medigap Market . Your medicare number will always consist of you or your spouses social security number with a letter at the end indicating any number of different statuses . If you have a letter T -LRB- Temporary -RRB- in your medicare number it means that you are not currently drawing social security payments . If and when you do begin drawing social security payments the T will be replaced by a letter A indicating you are the primary beneficiary drawing benefits under your social security number . In case you did n't already know , if you are not drawing social security your medicare part B premium will be billed to you quarterly and if you are drawing social security your Part B premium will be deducted automatically from your check every month .
You must have Medicare parts A and B to receive retirement benefits from DFAS . The premium for part B is deducted from your Social Security retirement benefit . Medicare A & B starts the month of your 65th birthday , whether you are receiving retirement benefits from Social Security or not . If you are not receiving social security retirement benefits you will be billed separately for the Part B . It is possible , although inadvisable , to refuse Part B . You shouldnt do that unless you are covered under an employer provided health plan .
Social Security Disability Insurance is a payroll tax social program . It falls under the pervue of Social Security Administration . It provides income to people who cant work because of a disability . Social Security Disability can be temporary or permanent benefit . Social Security Disability does not depend on the income of the disabled individual receiving it .
Social Security is a supplemental retirement plan . It is generally not advised that one plan to use social security as his or her sole retirement plan . Originally Social Security was designed to be an income plan for people who had lived extraordinarily long and were at a stage in life where working became extremely difficult if not physically impossible .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can Health Insurance Be Cancelled ?
Health Insurance Companies can not drop you as a policyholder at will . The only reason thet may drop a policyholder is for not telling of a prexisting condition , fraud , and related misrepresentations . Non payment of premiums and if you are in a group plan with employers , and switch jobs then there is a chance you may stay on through the COBRA act . They can not discontinue coverageyou in the middle of treatment . As with all insurance companiesit is best to be truthful with all questions that are asked and that will save you time and error .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
You can cancel your health insurance . If it is individual health insurance you purchased directly from a health insurance carrier you should be able to contact their billing and eligibility unit to cancel your coverage or contact your insurance broker for them to assist you in the termination . If you purchased your individual coverage directly through Healthcare.gov without the assistance of a health insurance broker then you are on your own as far as dealing with the helpful people at Heathcare.gov -LRB- and to be honest , while they are government employees my experience with them on the whole has n't been bad -RRB- but even then you should really be dealing with the insurance carrier you selected . Perhaps you are insured under a group health insurance plan at your place of employment and you are paying your share of the group insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis under a Section 125 plan -LRB- an IRS approved program that allows your insurance premiums to be taken out of your paycheck before your taxes are calculated -RRB- . If your work status has notchanged -LRB- e.g - going from full-time to part-time status -RRB- and you have not experienced one of the allowed change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , having a child , etc. -RRB- under the IRS regulations then you are essentially locked into your current enrollment status until your group 's next renewal date . In this circumstance simply deciding after you 've enrolled in the group health plan that you want to use that money for some other purpose is not reason enough to allow you to cancel your group health insurance coverage . This would be the circumstance where you might not be allowed to cancel your health insurance coverage .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
Certainly , but you do not want this situation as most policies contain a ` other insurance ' clause in them and this could create problems you do not need in the event of a loss/claim occurringin the ` overlap ' period . Follow the cancellation procedures outlined in the policy you desire to cancel and have no gap between the cancelled policy and the replacement policy . DO NOT RELY ON A NEW BROKER OR AGENT TO CANCEL YOUR EXISTING POLICY WITHOUT GETTING DOCUMENTATION IN WRITING THEY ARE SENDING APPROPRIATE CANCELLATION DOCUMENTS AND EVIDENCE TO YOUR CURRENT CARRIER . Remember , the contract is between you and your current carrier and only you -LRB- the named insured -RRB- can request cancellation of your policy . Also be aware that ` auto pay ' or ` EFT ' payment modes on an existing policy may not be terminated immediately and your account may be ` swept ' for a premium due within the next 21 to 30 days . Make sure your auto pay or EFT plan is terminated asap -LRB- and get evidence -RRB- when your policy is cancelled .
Can you cancel your term life insurance ? Yes , you can cancel a term policy a couple of ways . First , simply let the insurance company know in writing that you wish to cancel . They will cancel on the date asked for or the date of receipt of the letter if no cancelation date is given . They will refund any premium unused . The second way is to let the premium lapse . Why would you do it this way ? Because it gives you a grace period to really be sure it 's what you want to do . I remember my first day in this business , there was a couple of people in the office crying in loud voices , `` but he did n't mean it '' . They were there trying to reinstate a policy that the owner had just cancelled and died like a week later . There was the letter from the insured , demanding his policy be cancelled on a certain date and it was . Unfortunately , he died a few days after .
A homowners policy can be cancelled prior to the completion of the policy term . All coverage ends on the date of cancellation . The company will cancel a policy if the scheduled premium isnt received . It will cancel if you have by fraud , misrepresentation or by omission of fact caused the company to issue a policy that they would not otherwise have issued . They will cancel the policy if there has been a material change in the property that would increase the likelihood of claim . The company is required by law to allow a certain period of time before cancelling the policy . Unused premium is returned according to policy provisions .
You have significant power to walk away from any insurer . Most states operate with regulations regarding how a cancellation in mid term is treated . Before you leap to canceling your Progressive policy , check with the Insurance department in your state . They will know whether there is a requirement to pro rate the premium or not . Pro rated cancellations are the norm and this is how that works . If you cancel an annual policy for which you paid the whole premium and you cancel at exactly six months , then the company will return to you 50 % of the premium . So , just make sure what the cancellation requirements are in your state .
Homeowners Insurance can be cancelled at any time by the Insured . The Insured may be required to submit a signed request to cancel the policy ; it is important to purchase a new policy and make sure it is effective the same date as the cancellation of your old policy . All policies have a Standard Time of inception and expiration at : 12:01 a.m. . There is an online link available to obtain a quote and purchase Home Insurance directly online in multiple States . The link is : WEBSITELINK If the reason for changing carriers is due to an issue with an inspection which was conducted -LRB- interior or exterior -RRB- on your property , we must advise that all carriers are now inspecting risks which means you will most probably have the same issue with another carrier . On the other hand , an insurance carrier has legal restrictions regarding the cancellation of an insurance policy ; they may only cancel a policy for any underwriting reason during the first 60 days of a new insurance policy . They may cancel a policy at any time for non-payment of premium following the State requirement for legal notice .
The policy documents should have a ` cancellation ' section - usually found in the Policy Conditions . This will give instructions for cancellation . You should be able to mail the originalpolicy with a written request for cancellation -LRB- subsequent to the date of mailing -RRB- and evidence you have either replaced coverage or the plates were surrendered and coverage is no longer required for the registration . Regulations vary state to state and if the state you have the registration in has ` compulsory ' insurance , you will have to obtain the evidence mentioned . Remember , if you surrender plates one day , have the coverage cancelled the next day - auto insurance usually cancels 12:01 am on the day the cancellation is requested . A competent agent or broker should be able to guide you . You c an always contact your carrier for info .
Yes , you can cancel your own Disability Insurance policy . Non-cancellable Disability Insurance refers to the insurance company 's inability to cancel your policy unless you want it cancelled . You are also able to adjust Disability Insurance , which may be a more palatable option than cancelling it , if you no longer need as much coverage as you used to require .
That is a great question ! Yes , you can cancel the contract with the company , and the company can cancel it also . They will cancel the policy if they find that you were dishonest when applying , or failed to make timely payments . You can cancel in writing , or by choosing to no longer make payments . I 'd suggest that you speak with an agent before cancelling your policy , there are some things that you should know before you do . If you would like more detail , please contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
An auto insurance policy can be cancelled at any time by you , or may be cancelled for non-payment by your insurance company . Your current provider will probably require proof of new insurance at the time of cancellation , as well as a signed request to cancel the policy if you are requesting the cancellation .
Universal life policies are somewhat tricky . What happens when you cancel a universal life policy depends on when you cancel the policy . In the beginning years of a UL it has no cash value accumulated , so if you cancel during that stage nothing happens other than the policy terminates . You get no money back . In the mid range years of the policy it will likely have some cash value , so if you cancel it during that period you may receive the cash value . In the later years of a UL , unless you have kept pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' , -LRB- in other words paid increasingly higher premiums -RRB- , the cash value that has accumulated may be reduced by they increasing cost of insurance until there is no more cash value remaining . At that point the policy may terminate . So if you cancel the policy while it has cash value you will receive the cash value . If there is no cash value when you cancel the policy it will simply terminate .
Yes . You can cancel your car insurance at any time . The question that you may want to know before cancelling is whether your insurance company pro-rates or short-rates your cancellation . A pro-rated cancellation is more favorable for you since you are charged only for the days that have been used . In Illinois , the insurance companies by law have to pro-rate an auto cancellation .
Any time that fraud is detected the insurance company can cancel an auto policy . If you stage an accident in order to file a claim , the company will probably cancel your policy . If new information comes to light that would change the nature of your application , that could lead to a cancellation . If you are arrested for transporting moonshine in your car , your auto insurance company will likely cancel your policy as soon as they find out . If you fail to pay the premium your policy can be cancelled .
If in fact you have already purchased new car insurance with another company , then yes , you cartainly can request a cancellation of your previous policy . The old policy should be cancelled effective the date that your new policy went into effect . The request to cancel will be requested in writing for record purposes . YOu can talk to your new insurance professional about that . They will more han likely be able to prepare a standard form for your signature that stipulates the exact cancellation date . This will be signed by you then forwarded to your old carrier for processing . Any refund owed to you will be sent upon the processing of that cancellation .
It depends upon whether you have individual or group health insurance . If you are covered under an individual health insurance policy you can terminate your coverage essentially at anytime . When I say essentially , if you 've made your monthly premium payment and decide in mid-month you want to cancel your coverage that cancelation almost certainly would n't go into effect until the first of the next month . It 's highly unlikely you would be allowed to cancel retroactively or get a prorated refund . Cancelling group health insurance coverage can be more complicated if your employer is using a Section 125 Plan and you are paying any portion of your premiums on a pre-tax basis . In this situation you are locked into your coverage until the next open enrollment period unless you experience what is called a change of life status event . This would be an event like getting married , divorced or having or adopting a child -LRB- to give the most common examples -RRB- . Simply deciding that you do n't want the coverage anymore or hitting a rough patch financiallyin and ofthemselves arenot a qualifying events under IRS guidelines and do not meet the criteria for terminating your group coverage . So , whether your employer has a Section 125 Pre-tax plan in place -LRB- and these days most employer 's do -RRB- is a key factor in determining whether or not you can drop your coverage at sometime other than the plan 's annual renewal .
Yes an insurance company can non-renew your homeowners insurance policy for several reasons . Main reasons are change in risk . This could be due to claims or hazards on your home that have increased and as a homeowner you fail to mitigate . In other words if the insurance carrier can no longer tolerate you as a risk the insurance carrier can chose non renew . Keep in mind all polices are self terminating at the end of a term and the insurance company can chose at that time to either offer a renewal or chose to not renew . This is not an actual cancellation . Cancellations are actually much more difficult . The only way a cancellation occurs is if you the insured fail to make a payment or often on a newly written policy a hazard was not dealt with or there was mis-representation on the application . These types of cancellations however fall on the insured and not the insurance provider .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Do You Become Eligible For Medicare ?
Most people become eligible for Medicare at age 65 but there are some situations where someone under 65 can receive Medicare , as well . 1 -RRB- If you have a disability and have been receiving SSDI for more than 24 months , you will automatically be enrolled in Medicare in the 25th month . 2 -RRB- If you have been diagnosed with End Stage Renal Disease , are on kidney dialysis or had a kidney transplant , and a number of other qualifying factors , you are eligible to receive Medicare . Speak to a representative for details as there are many qualifications involved . 3 -RRB- You have ALS and have enrolled for SSDI . Note : Railroad workers will have some different stipulations . For all of the above , contact Social Security at 800-772-1213 for accurate and up to date information .
Medicare , is , of course , a federal program for legal US citizens . To be eligible , you must be age 65 and paid taxes for at least 10 years . You also must be a legal citizen of the US and lived here for at least five years . When you become eligible for Medicare , there is an Open Enrollment when you will not have to answer any medical questions to qualify for various options .
You become eligible for Medicare at age 65 , if you or your spouse have paid into Medicare the required amount of time in order to receive Medicare . There are a few ways to become eligible for Medicare under age 65 , including being on Disability for 24 months or being disabled due to ALS .
The answer to your question will vary somewhat depending upon where you are getting your health insurance . Are you a new employee anticipating your employer based coverage ? Or , are you a person looking for a personal , individual major medical insurance plan ? After January 1 , 2014 in the employer based setting and under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act , once you are hired as a full-time eligible employee or your hours are increased to full-time status , then the employer can not have a waiting period that exceeds 90 calendar days from the date you become eligible . So , an employer can have a waiting period of anywhere from `` date of hire '' to the 90 calendar days from date of hire . For administrative and payroll keeping purposes I am finding most employers are opting for a policy on a new hire becoming eligible for coverage on the `` first day of the month following 60-days '' . In the individual health insurance world we do have to keep the new open enrollment periods in mind and how failure to enroll during this annual election period can impact a person 's eligibility for health insurance coverage between open enrollment times . In other words , if you `` just did n't get around to it '' and you 've had no change of life status event since open enrollment closed then you ca n't take out a major medical health insurance policy until the next open enrollment period for a 1st of the year start date at best . -LRB- If you qualify you can take out a Short Term Medical policy to carry you through until then -RRB- Assuming yours is a normal individual major medical enrollment then the following rules of thumb apply to when your effective date of coverage is supposed to be ; 1 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted on or before the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the next month . For example , an enrollment submitted on December 10th would be for an effective date of January 1st . 2 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted after the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the following month . For example , an application is submitted on December 20th would be for an effective date of February 1st . Open enrollment season for 2015 begins on November 15th , 2014 and runs through February 15th , 2015 .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
You must be eligible for Medicare Part A to be eligible for Medicare Part B . If you do not qualify for premium-free Part A , you must either be a United States citizen , a permanent resident , or another lawfully admitted resident -LRB- with at least 5 years of permanent residency in the U.S. -RRB- when you go to apply for Part B . If you do n't meet these requirements , you would not be eligible for Part B. Also , if you 're under 65 and do not meet the disability or end-stage renal disease exceptions to receive Medicare benefits , you would not be eligible for Medicare Part B .
Medicare supplement plans and Medicare Advantage plans were developed for a very simple reason . Medicare does not provide 100 % coverage for health care services and does not cover some services at all . Medicare is a creature of the early 1960 's and people over age 65 at that time on average only had several more years of life expectancyplus there was a lot less that the health care system could do for peopleback then . These factors have changed significantly 50 years later with seniors living longer , more active lives and with a multitude of medical and pharmaceutical treatments available to them . If you are becoming eligible for Medicare today , there is a very good chance that over the remainder of your life you will have multiple opportunities to utilize services under Medicare for which you will have to share financial responsibility -LRB- e.g. - hospitalizations -RRB- and it is almost impossible to become a senior citizen in America these days and not be on one or more prescription medications -LRB- prescription coverage for seniors on Medicare did n't even really exist until Medicare Part D was created by the Bush Administration in 2003 -RRB- . It is to protect yourself against these out-of-pocket expenses that people purchase Medicare supplemental coverage that fills in most of the gaps in Medicare 's coverage .
Any Medicare beneficiary should always file all of their medical claims their Medicare , as well as their Medicare supplement plan , any time they receive care. , especially for hospital services that are covered under Medicare Part A , which is provide at no cost to any eligible US citizen that worked , and paid income taxes , for at least 40 quarters before becoming Medicare eligible .
You can enroll in a Medicare drug plan when you turn 65 and enroll in Medicare . If you are disabled -LRB- Social Security definition -RRB- and Medicare eligible you can buy a Part D plan when you initially become eligible for Medicare . You can also buy a drug plan during the annual enrollment period .
Normally , one is eligible for Medicare at age 65 . Enrollment for Part A is automatic based on prior employment . Persons under age 65 can be eligible if they qualify as disabled by Medicare . If one becomes disabled , they should apply to Medicare to determine if they qualify for Medicare .
That is a great question ! The vast majority of people will enroll as they near their 65th birthday . That is when you become eligible , unless there are special circumstances . Kidney failure is one , and having it regardless of age can allow you to become eligible . Extended disability is another . Thanks for asking !
It is difficult to understand the exact context of your question . If it is in the most general sense then you need to be a U.S. citizen or legal resident to be eligible for insurance coverage . If you are talking about when you become eligible for coverage at your place of employment that offers group health insurance that will vary somewhat depending upon their personnel policies . In 2014 and forward an employer can not have a waiting period of more than 90 calendar days before an eligible new hire can be covered under their group health plan . You should check with your employer or their personnel department to determine what their company 's policy is , though this should have been explained to you at your time of hire . Finally , if you are talking about what happens when you show up at the doctor 's office , pharmacy or hospital , they will want to see your insurance I.D. card and will call your insurance carrier to verify that you are eligible for coverage -LRB- some people try to use their I.D. card from a company where they are no longer employed and no longer covered through -RRB- and what your benefits are .
I assume you 're referring to a rise in cost of your current health insurance premium . If the employee 's share of the annual premium is greater than 9.5 % of their annual household income , that would created a qualifying event . For an individual , and income change would be considered a qualifying event if your new income causes you to become eligible -LRB- or ineligible -RRB- for a subsidy -LRB- Advanced Premium Tax Credit -RRB- or if it causes you to have a change in your Cost Sharing Reduction -LRB- in other words , if you become eligible for a Silver 73 when you previously had a Silver 70 , for example -RRB- .
If you are under age 65 and have applied for disability with Social Security , if approved by Social Security you will eventually become eligible for Medicare . The general guideline is following 2 years of Social Security disability payments you are eligible for Medicare but there are specific medical conditions , such as ESRD , where you can be awarded Medicare benefits before two years have passed .
Most people will become eligible for Medicare when they turn 65 . If you are a US citizen or legal resident and have at least 40 Social Security wage quarters , have lived in the US for at least 5 years , you should be eligible for Medicare . If you are covered under a group health plan you may want to delay participation in Medicare Part B.
You are eligible for Medicare Part D at age 65 or at the same that that you are eligible to enroll in Medicare -LRB- Part A and Part B -RRB- . This is also when you are eligible for Medicare Part C and all Medigap plans , and when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Advantage Plans .
Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . If you arent yet 65 , you might also qualify for coverage if you have a disability or with End-Stage Renal disease -LRB- permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant -RRB- . Here are some simple guidelines . You can get Part A at age 65 without having to pay premiums if : You already get retirement benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . You are eligible to get Social Security or Railroad benefits but have n't yet filed for them . You or your spouse had Medicare-covered government employment . If you are under 65 , you can get Part A without having to pay premiums if you have : Received Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board disability benefits for 24 months . End-Stage Renal Disease and meet certain requirements . While you do not have to pay a premium for Part A if you meet one of these conditions , you must pay for Part B if you want it . The Part B monthly premium in 2013 is $ 104.90 per month . It is deducted from your Social Security , Railroad Retirement , or Civil Service Retirement check . If you dont get any of the above payments , Medicare sends you a bill for your Part B premium every 3 months . Note : You will be eligible for Medicare when you turn 65 even if you are not eligible for Social Security retirement benefits .
You 're eligible for Medicare when you 're turning 65 years old . You can apply for Medicare benefits up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . I recommend applying during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of covered healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For most Americans with individual health coverage , their policy will terminate , or drop , at age 65 , when they become eligible for Medicare . People who receive coverage from their employer may be able to remain on their group coverage beyond age 65 , depending on the rules governing your employer 's plan . In such a case , you should also consider whether or not to accept Medicare coverage , or you may incur penalties for enrolling in Medicare after you are first eligible .
Most people become eligible for Medicare at age 65 but there are some situations where someone under 65 can receive Medicare , as well . 1 -RRB- If you have a disability and have been receiving SSDI for more than 24 months , you will automatically be enrolled in Medicare in the 25th month . 2 -RRB- If you have been diagnosed with End Stage Renal Disease , are on kidney dialysis or had a kidney transplant , and a number of other qualifying factors , you are eligible to receive Medicare . Speak to a representative for details as there are many qualifications involved . 3 -RRB- You have ALS and have enrolled for SSDI . Note : Railroad workers will have some different stipulations . For all of the above , contact Social Security at 800-772-1213 for accurate and up to date information .
end question
start question
annuities
Is Variable Annuity A Security ?
That is an excellent question ! Unlike fixed annuities or indexed annuities , yes , variable annuities are considered a security . The agent needs to have a securities license to sell you one , and you will have all kinds of authorities looking over the process to ensure that it is right for you . These can be very risky investments , so please be sure that you understand what you are buying . Thanks for asking !
FINRA governs the sale of variable annuities . This association implements the directives of the Security and Exchange commission . Your state insurance commissioner supervises the activity of the agent selling that annuity because it is an insurance product . The idea behind a variable annuity is to participate in the rise and fall of a group of securities that matches your tolerance for risk .
Is a variable annuity a security ? Yes , a variable annuity is subject to the same rules and oversight of the SEC that a security would be . A person selling variable annuities must be securities registered and comply with all the transaction rules established by FINRA and the SEC . One other thing to think about if you 're considering a variable annuity is that the RISK in type of product is more along the lines of a stock purchase than a nonqualified product like a fixed annuity .
A variable annuity is a security governed by the SEC and sold through FINRA registered representatives hold at least a series 6 and 63 license . It also has an insurance component to it as well . And to the extent that it is an insurance product is subject to the department of insurance jurisdiction .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
Is a variable annuity a security ? Yes , a variable annuity is subject to the same rules and oversight of the SEC that a security would be . A person selling variable annuities must be securities registered and comply with all the transaction rules established by FINRA and the SEC . One other thing to think about if you 're considering a variable annuity is that the RISK in type of product is more along the lines of a stock purchase than a nonqualified product like a fixed annuity .
Variable Annuities are a security . The Security Exchange Commission has jurisdiction over the filings . FINRA oversees the distribution practices of variable annuities . Licensed registered representatives must have a series 6 and 63 to sell variable annuities . Some variable group annuities are not considered securities in certain states . Check with the department of insurance in your state to confirm .
A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities are classified as a security . Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities have separate sub accounts using market equities and bond investments that can lose money and incur policy expenses . A personal financial profile needs to be created with a risk tolerance assessment before moving forward with the purchase of a non-qualified or qualified tax deferred variable annuities or the allocation of the separate sub accounts . Variable annuity policy expense loads can be a concern as policy expenses are paid out of deposits made into the annuity regardless of positive or negative performance . Variable annuities , like all annuities , are designed ultimately for generating income . You may want to consider purchasing an income rider that may offer guaranteed lifetime income .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals .
A variable annuity is a registered security regulated by FINRA and an insurance product regulated by the department of insurance of each state . Because variable annuities are a registered security , only a registered representative with a broker dealer can offer to sell them . And because a variable annuity is a security with exposure to market conditions , it can experience losses in their accounts .
Products , in and of themselves , dont present a good value or a bad value . Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
Some advisers use invest for securities and save for non-securities . You can invest or save from your cash flow on a monthly basis or pay a lump sum deposit into an annuity . For investors : variable annuities , a security , are a mid to long term investment when utilizing market equities and bonds via the separate sub accounts . Know your liquidity needs before investing and risk tolerance profile because you can lose money with variable annuities . For savers : fixed interest rate or indexed annuities , both non-securities , are short to midterm savings options . Know your liquidity needs before making a product purchase .
A variable annuity like a fixed annuity allows the owner to accumulate money on a tax deferred basis . Both types of annuities allow the owner to select a lifetime income to settle the contract . There are variations of that privilege but that is the basic benefit . The accumulation of money for the fixed annuity is guaranteed by the insurance company issuing the policy . The accumulation of money for the variable annuity allows the owner to select from a group of accounts , some of which are tied to publicly traded securities . The insurance company does not guarantee those securities that are tied to publicly traded securities .
end question
