start question
health-insurance
Which Private Health Insurance Is Good ?
A `` Good '' insurance carrier or plan really depends on your individual situation . However , as a broker of 9 years I 've found that using these three methods help me find my clients what 's good for them : Use Top RatedCarriers -LRB- Humana , UnitedHealthOne , Cigna , Aetna etc -RRB- Listen to my prospects needs Shop all the carriers for the best benefits at the lowest rate my client qualifies for Follow those simple rules and you should end up with `` Good '' coverage .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
G'day mate , you nearly had me stumped with this question . Lifetime loading is a feature of the Australian health insurance system and not a part of health insurance plans sold in the United States . Down under , if a person over age 30 does not purchase private health insurance they will become subject to a premium penalty -LRB- or loading -RRB- of 2 % for each year they have delayed in purchasing private health insurance . For example , Mr. Dundee waits until he is 35 to buy private health insurance . He has waited 4 years past being age 30 and his monthly premium as a 35 year old will be inflated by 8 % -LRB- 2 % x 4 years -RRB- above what the premium would have been for someone who has had coverage since they age 30 . This legal approach is designed to incentivize Australians to purchase private health insurance .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Private split dollar life insurance is a plan that allows for the costs and/or benefits of a life insurance to be split between two private parties . Those participating in private split dollar arrangements are usually family members or their trusts . Often , a second to die life insurance policy is used with a life insurance trust . To find out more about options using private split dollar life insurance , contact a knowledgeable life insurance agent .
There is no uniform health insurance system in Europe , each nation has it 's own system . On the whole , European nations have taken a more socialized approach to financing health care than we have in the United States -LRB- though ObamaCare is kind of changing that -RRB- . In Switzerland you are mandated to purchase private health insurance . In Britain they have the National Health Service that provides health insurance for the masses while at the same time having a growing private health insurance and health care delivery system for the people who can afford to operate outside of the national system -LRB- the class system remains alive and well in England and many European nations -RRB- . Some European systems give the illusion of being `` free '' but people are really paying for their care in the form of higher taxes and rationing of care along with price controls on healthcare providers . While there are things we Americans can learn from the European experience , the Europeans have hardly achieved perfection when it comes to health care and health insurance .
Health insurance is a type of insurance coverage that pays for medical and surgical expenses caused by illness or bodily injury of the insured person . It can be purchased privately , provided by an employer , or , as in the case of Medicaid or Medicare , be provided by the government . Payments for medical services can either be paid by the health insurance company directly to the health care provider , or it can be paid to the insured person to reimburse them for payments made , or a combination of both . There generally is a deductible , which is the amount the insured person must pay for health care received until the insurance plan then starts to pay . And there is usually a co-pay , which is a % of the health care expenses incurred above the deductible , or else is paid for predefined services for which the deductible does not enter in .
Government employees generally get their health insurance from the FEHB program -LRB- Federal Employee Health Benefits -RRB- rather than buying health insurance through the health insurance exchanges or a group plan through the private sector . The programs are structured in a similar manner to health plans available to private-industry workers - e.g. networks for plans can be structured with an HMO , PPO , Fee-for-service , etc. and feature deductibles , coinsurance , HSAs , HRAs , etc. .
That is a great question ! I guess the best way to answer it is you say pota-toe , they say pota-tah . Technically , Medicare is public , because it is administered by the Federal Government . But ... they use private insurers to run it . The best way to describe it is that it 's like the way your employer runs their insurance program - it 's public , because it 's offered to all employees and they pay for some of it , but the plans are offered through a private insurance company . The confusion for the public vs. private debate was an attempt by debating politicians to generate confusion , and make things difficult . Since that seems to be what we pay them to do , they were just really doing a good job ! I hope that this helps a little at simplifying the answer for you . If you would like to try to clear this up a little more , please feel free to contact me , I love a challenge ! -LRB- And who better to challenge us than a bunch of politicians ? -RRB- Thanks for asking !
You might want to consider purchasing a private policy instead of the optional life insurance offered by your employer . You may be getting the first $ 50,000 of life insurance at work for free , and the first $ 50,000 is usually a nontaxable benefit . But the amount beyond that , which is called `` optional '' life insurance , does not generally involve those perks . While the price may seem good , most life insurance policies offered through work do not stay that same price , and many end when you leave that job . If you are older or have developed a health condition when your employment ends , you may find that the prices are far higher than you could have locked in through a private policy while you were working .
Private Disability Insurance is Disability Insurance that is purchased privately vs being supplied by the insured person 's employer in a group policy . Persons who are self employed , or who do not have group Disability Insurance because their employer does not offer it , are most likely to buy private Disability Insurance .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Medigap is very different than Medicare Advantage . Medigap , offered by a private insurance company , works in conjuction with Medicare , helping to cover some or all of the remaining balance of your bills after Medicare pays their share . With Medicare Advantage , which can often be obtained at no cost , your entire health coverage is provided by a private insurance company , one who must cover as much , if not more , than Original Medicare . For most people , the combination of Original Medicare and Medigap Plan F offers the most coverage available . If you do not have a budget that allows you to purchase a Medigap plan , then consider an Advantage plan , which will provide more coverage than simply remaining on Original Medicare .
Although unemployment does not technically offer health insurance , there may be other valid options , including : 1 . COBRA continuation of coverage , which the unemployed person recently had on the prior employer 's group plan . 2 . HIPAA portability coverage 3 . Medicaid for those with low income , for which the unemployed person may qualify 4 . A private insurance policy , known as an Individual / Family plan 5 . A private short-term policy to cover the gap between jobs , or the new-hire waiting period imposed by the new job . 6 . A conversion policy , in some circumstances 7 . Options in various states for high risk pools or guarantee-issued coverage . It is important for you to consult with an expert insurance agent/broker in your state , because acceptance of one of these options may disqualify you for another one . It is important to know your rights to coverage , the eligibility rules for that coverage , and the timeframes and deadlines that apply .
No . Medigap is health insurance which works as a supplement to original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- . Medicare Advantage is a private health insurance plan offered by an insurance company that provides health insurance to Medicare beneficiaries that is at least as good as original Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- . You may not have both Medigap insurance and a Medicare Advantage Plan at the same time .
The government originally established Medicare with two parts . Part A to cover hospitals and part B to cover outpatient services . Both of these are administered by the Medicare -LRB- CMS -RRB- and there is no choice of coverage . Later Part D was initiated to cover prescriptions . These plans called PDP 's are administered by private insurance companies . Part C , Medicare Advantage Plans are plans that are administered by private insurance companies instead of Medicare . As far as which plan is best , that will depend on your individual situation ; where you live , what doctors and hospitals you go to , do you travel outside the area a lot , what your prescriptions are , and other factors . Find a good independent agent who represents most of the Medicare plans in your area and have the agent help you with your choice . You can also find information at Medicare.Gov .
In 1959 , Congress passed the Federal Employees Health Benefits Act -LRB- FEHBA -RRB- . Its primary purpose was to attract & retain talented personnel to compete with the private sector . It is made available to both active & retired workers . Congress participates in the FEBHA . Currently , the FEBHA offers about 300 different plans with a `` defined contribution '' approach ; wherethe better the benefits the more the cost to the employee . The plans are definitely better than private sector insurance and where the private sector has virtually eliminated retiree benefits , the FEBHA has not . So , member of congress that serves just one term would be eligible for the benefits for remainder of his/her life . It is not necessarily special to them , but it is different and probably a much better plan than the average American would have access to plus it can be carried throughout the retirement years .
A Medicare levy surcharge is levied against taxpayers in Australia who do not take out private hospital insurance , and who earn above a certain income . The Medicare levy is intended to encourage Australian citizens to take our private cover and use the private system to lessen the burden on Medicare .
Yes , people can collect Social Security Disability benefits , and do not have to buy private Disability Insurance to get cash while being disabled . However , to get Social Security disability benefits you must generally be disabled for at least a year , and be unable to work -LRB- or be trained to work -RRB- at any job . Private Disability Insurance pays benefits more quickly . Also , with DI , if you have the `` own occupation '' feature , it pays if you can not work at your OWN job , not just ANY job . Finally , private disability insurance pays a higher benefit than Social Security DI . You can even supplement SSDI with DI .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Minors Be Beneficiaries On Life Insurance ?
Minors can be beneficiaries on a life insurance policy . Most of the time minor children are contingent beneficiaries as a backup to their parents if both were to die . But just because you can do it doesnt mean you should it . When minors receive death benefit proceeds after both parents have died custodial control and/or guardianship can arise . The creation of a trust could be a better alternative . Consult with an attorney before placing minor children as beneficiaries on your policy .
Yes , minors can be beneficiaries on life insurance . If the insured person passes away while the child is still a minor -LRB- under age 18 in some states , under age 21 in others -RRB- , the death benefit must be managed by an adult until the child reaches the age of adulthood . This helpful article describes some ways of legally handling this situation . WEBSITELINK
Minors can certainly be named as a beneficiary to an insurance policy . But what you want to consider is what the purpose of the insurance is . If you want the insurance to cover your final and burial expenses then you may not want to name a minor because he or she will not have access to the money until age 18 or 21 depending on where you live . If the purpose is to leave a legacy for the minor , the best thing to do is create a living trust . Name the trust as the beneficiary and earmark those funds for the minor . A living trust is very flexible . You can basically say when and for what reason the minor can have access to the funds . You can say that money can be paid for the minors private education ; you can say the minor gets 25 % at age 21 , etc. . And the best part is whatever you have specified ca n't be changed after your passing AND the trust does not go through probate . So , there is no court intervention or delays .
Minors can be beneficiaries on a life insurance policy . Most of the time minor children are contingent beneficiaries as a backup to their parents if both were to die . But just because you can do it doesnt mean you should it . When minors receive death benefit proceeds after both parents have died custodial control and/or guardianship can arise . The creation of a trust could be a better alternative . Consult with an attorney before placing minor children as beneficiaries on your policy .
This is a very interesting question because life insurance carriers allow for a lot of flexibility in beneficiary designations . For example , you have the primary beneficiary . This person -LRB- or entity , such as a corporation or trust -RRB- will get the money when the insured dies . What if I unfortunately the primary beneficiary is not alive -LRB- or in business -RRB- when the insured dies ? That is why you can designate a contingent beneficiary . This beneficiary will get the money in those exact circumstances - when the primary beneficiary is not available . What if you wanted to name multiple primary or contingent beneficiaries ? That can be done . Do they have to get equal shares ? No . As a matter of fact , especially when the contingent beneficiary is children , parents often do not apportion the benefit equally . What if you want to set up successor beneficiaries along bloodlines ? Such as your child , but if your child is not available , then your childs child ? This can also be done . Make sure you discuss this with your estate planning attorney . What if you want to make the beneficiaries minors ? Not a good idea . An insurance company will not release money to a minor . You will need to do some estate planning to secure that money .
There are actually two common but different ways to assign life insurance . The first way to assign is with assigning the beneficiary for a temporary purpose . An example would be a financial institution loaning a substantial amount of money may require a person to assign them as beneficiary until the loan is repaid . Once this loan is repaid the assignment of beneficiary would go back to the original beneficiary , unless specifically changed again by the policy owner . The second common practice of assignment of life insurance is to assign a new owner of a policy . This is most common with cash value life insurance which a parent or grandparent purchased on a minor child . A minor can not own a policy with financial decisions , so an adult , usually parent or grandparent , will be owner until the child becomes an adult . The assign is made from the parent or previous owner to the insured child as the new owner .
Sure you can . All you need is a simple form . Ask your broker , orl call the carrier directly . Big question : what will you do if unfortunately this beneficiary is not alive when the benefit can be paid ? You need a contingent beneficiary as a backup . Give that some thought : who should be second in line to receive the money ? Another big question : is the beneficiary going to be a minor ? Did you know that an insurance company will not pay a benefit to a minor ? This means that you need to do some estate planning , in terms of having an executor and custodian appointed . An attorney who specializes in estate planning can help you .
A minor can be a life insurance beneficiary , but it is generally in the child 's best interest to make the beneficiary of your life insurance policy be a trust , or trusted relative or friend who will use the money for the welfare of the child . That is because minors can not legally handle the proceeds and the court could appoint a guardian to do so for them .
Yes , a life insurance beneficiary can be a minor . However , if naming a minor as beneficiary , the policy owner should consider naming a financial guardian for the child at the same time , as that will be required by the court if the insured person dies before the child reaches the age of adulthood . If a financial guardian is not designated to handle the life insurance proceeds for the child , the court will appoint one .
That is a great question ! It will depend upon the insurance companies rules . I have worked with some that will not allow a minor without guardianship or an established trust fund to be named as a beneficiary . Others are not so particular , but it may not be in your best interests to allow it . Often there are problems legally transferring funds to minors , and unless the guardian or trust is established , the money gets held up needlessly . Check with your State laws concerning minors , and then with your agent , and see if that can even be done . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Yes , a minor child can be named beneficiary of a life insurance policy and often are as a contingent beneficiary . It is a good idea to set up a trust to disperse funds to the minor child or name a guardian in your will to take care of the money on the child 's behalf .
Yes and they often are with young families . Many attorneys recommend declaring a financial steward or custodial trustee for the financial disbursements to minors . Sometimes a trust is the beneficiary on behalf of minor children . Interestingly , there is always a contingent beneficiary option in a life insurance application .
Yes a minor child can be a life insurance proceeds beneficiary . If you plan to make the minor child the primary beneficiary , you should take these steps as well . You should have a will in place to name a trust or legal guardian to hold and disperse the funds until the child turns 18 years old . Otherwise a probate judge will decide the child 's guardianship . That court appointed guardian will disperse the funds .
Yes , a minor can be a beneficiary of a life insurance policy . If a minor is named as beneficiary , be sure to appoint a financial guardian in your will to manage the money for your child until they reach the age of adulthood -LRB- either 18 or 21 , depending on where you live -RRB- . Otherwise , the court will appoint one for your child until they are of the age to manage their own money .
A qualified beneficiary must notify the plan administrator of a qualifying event within 60 days after divorce or legal separation or a child 's ceasing to be covered as a dependent under plan rules . Plan participants and beneficiaries generally must be sent an election notice not later than 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred . The individual then has 60 days to decide whether to elect COBRA continuation coverage . The person has 45 days after electing coverage to pay the initial premium . Qualified beneficiaries must be given an election period during which each qualified beneficiary may choose whether to elect COBRA coverage . Each qualified beneficiary may independently elect COBRA coverage . A covered employee or the covered employee 's spouse may elect COBRA coverage on behalf of all other qualified beneficiaries . A parent or legal guardian may elect on behalf of a minor child . Qualified beneficiaries must be given at least 60 days for the election . This period is measured from the later of the coverage loss date or the date the COBRA election notice is provided by the employer or plan administrator . The election notice must be provided in person or by first class mail within 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred .
Yes , a minor can be a beneficiary on life insurance . However , until they reach the age when they are legally considered old enough to manage their own money -LRB- which is either age 18 or age 20 , depending on the state in which you live -RRB- , someone else will need to be named to manage their money for them . 1 -RRB- This can be someone you specify in your will . Some people even name two guardians : one to take care of the money -LRB- guardian of the estate -RRB- and one to take care of the children -LRB- guardian of the person -RRB- . 2 -RRB- You can create a trust to be the beneficiary of the policy , with the trust spelling out how you want the money to be used on the minor 's behalf . 3 -RRB- If no guardian is specified or trust created , the court may have to appoint a guardian at the time after death when the policy proceeds are collected . You may want to visit with your lawyer and life insurance agent to be sure that you have your policy set up in the way that you want it to , if a tragedy should happen .
Yes , as Peggy mentioned you can name a minor as a beneficiary , however , you would be better served by at the very least leaving it in trust for a minor . Setting up a formal trust expressing your wishes would be preferred . In Canada , since you can direct that the proceeds be paid in the form of an annuity this should be explored . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
If a life insurance beneficiary is a minor , the court will appoint a guardian to handle the money for the child until they reach the age of 18 or 21 , depending on the state . If you want to select that person yourself , you can name a property guardian in your will , or name an adult custodian for the life insurance proceeds under the Uniform Transfers to Minor Act -LRB- UTMA -RRB- .
Yes , minors can be beneficiaries on life insurance . If the insured person passes away while the child is still a minor -LRB- under age 18 in some states , under age 21 in others -RRB- , the death benefit must be managed by an adult until the child reaches the age of adulthood . This helpful article describes some ways of legally handling this situation . WEBSITELINK
A life insurance trust is an irrevocable , non-amenable trust that is set up for the purpose of being owner and beneficiary of one or more life insurance policies . A life insurance trust generally exempts the life insurance policy from estate tax . The trust also can spell out how the Trustee should manage the death benefit so it best serves the needs of specified minors . Before deciding to set up a life insurance trust you should consult a reputable life insurance agent and lawyer . Some things to consider are that the Insured person can not be the Trustee , and only the Trustee can change the beneficiary . Also , the Insured person can not borrow from the life insurance policy .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can I Get Medicare Before Age 65 ?
It is possible to get Medicare before age 65 in some circumstances . Unfortunately , opting to take Social Security benefits before age 65 does NOT entitle you to Medicare benefits . Likewise , if your spouse is under age 65 when you retire , they are not eligible for Medicare until they turn age 65 . An alternate form of medical insurance must be secured for the interim , in those situations . Medicare can be obtained before age 65 if the patient has End Stage Renal Disease or ALS , within parameters . Persons who are on Social Security Disability for two years can also receive Medicare under age 65 .
It is possible to get Medicare before age 65 in some circumstances . Unfortunately , opting to take Social Security benefits before age 65 does NOT entitle you to Medicare benefits . Likewise , if your spouse is under age 65 when you retire , they are not eligible for Medicare until they turn age 65 . An alternate form of medical insurance must be secured for the interim , in those situations . Medicare can be obtained before age 65 if the patient has End Stage Renal Disease or ALS , within parameters . Persons who are on Social Security Disability for two years can also receive Medicare under age 65 .
Medicare Benefits are started automatically the first day of the month you turn 65 if you are already getting benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . Youll get your red , white and blue Medicare card in the mail 3 months before your 65th birthday . If youre not getting Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board and youre close to 65 , youll need to sign up . You can contact Social Security 3 months before you turn 65 , the month of your 65 birthday and 3 months after the month you turn 65 . Generally you wont pay a premium for Part A ; Part B will be deducted out of your Social Security Benefits and is based on your income . If you are still covered by your employers insurance you can decline your Part B coverage and save yourself that cost and apply later when your employer coverage ends . Once you have Medicare there are 2 main ways to get your Medicare coverage , there is Original Medicare or Medicare Advantage Plans . To keep thing simple if you chose Original Medicare you must buy a Part D Prescription Drug Coverage and you may also want to purchase Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . One thing to remember is that all Medigap policys with the same letter are identical in coverage the only difference is the price they charge you so shop around with a broker that represents multiple companies . If you chose Medicare Advantage its very similar to employer insurance where you have to see doctors that accept the insurance and there are small co-pays . Most Advantage plans include Medicare prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- and have low and sometimes no monthly premiums .
If you are receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you will be automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B at age 65 . If you are not yet retired and are not receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you must enroll for Medicare on your own . The best time to do it is three months before turning age 65 .
You normally need to be age 65 to get Medicare . You are automatically enrolled in Medicare at age 65 if you or your spouse has paid Medicare taxes for at least 40 quarters . You can get Medicare under age 65 if you have received Social Security Disability benefits for 24 months , are disabled and have ALS , or have worked for a government job long enough to qualify for Social Security Disability benefits . You might also qualify under age 65 if your partner has died or you are divorced from a partner who qualified for Medicare , or if you have received a kidney transplant or dialysis , in some situations .
You have to be age 65 to sign up for Medicare , unless you have end stage renal disease or Lou Gherig 's disease -LRB- within parameters set forth by Medicare -RRB- . You will receive Medicare at an age younger than 65 if you have been on Social Security Disability for 24 months and are under age 65 . If you are receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you will be automatically enrolled in Medicare at age 65 .
If you are age 65 when you receive Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare at age 65 . If you are not yet receiving Social Security benefits , you can still sign up for Medicare benefits at age 65 . When relying on your spouse 's eligibility , you can get Medicare at age 65 if your spouse is at least age 62 .
If your wife is age 65 and has paid into Medicare taxes for at least 10 years throughout her life , she can get Medicare . If she was a full time homemaker , she can get Medicare based on your contributions . She will need to wait until she is 65 , even if you retire and start getting Medicare before she turns 65 .
You can start on Medicare when you are age 65 . If you have paid into Social Security taxes at least 10 years , or are the dependent of a spouse who has done so , you can get Medicare Part A for free . If you were on Social Security Disability for 24 months , you can get Medicare if you are younger than age 65 . Some other ways to get Medicare at an age younger than 65 is if you have end stage renal disease or ALS .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
In order for someone to receive Medicare you need to be disable orage 65 . You will need to be disable for 2 years to receive Medicare . At age 65 you willbe eligible to apply forMedicare 3 months before you turn age 65 the month of your birthday and 3 monthsafter your birthday . Once you apply for Medicare you will need to apply for additional health 20 % that Original Medicare does not coverage . Original Medicare only coverage 's 80 % of you Medicare bills . You will have the options to apply for a Part C plan Medicare Advantage , Part D planmany plansor a Medicare Supplement plan . For more information contact Agent Ms. Best at 1866-491-1491 .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can sign up to receive Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . I believe you can click on `` Medicare '' under the benefits tab . There should be some easy instructions there that will walk you through the sign up process . Signing up online is preferable for those applying during their initial enrollment period -LRB- 3 months before age 65 , the month you turn 65 , and the 3 months after you turn age 65 -RRB- . If you 're applying under special enrollment , I recommend going down to your local social security office to get your paperwork processed . Please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can sign up to receive Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . I believe you can click on `` Medicare '' under the benefits tab . There should be some easy instructions there that will walk you through the sign up process . Signing up online is preferable for those applying during their initial enrollment period -LRB- 3 months before age 65 , the month you turn 65 , and the 3 months after you turn age 65 -RRB- . If you 're applying under special enrollment , I recommend going down to your local social security office to get your paperwork processed .
Medicare Part B has several enrollment periods that you should be aware of . The enrollment period that you may qualify for may vary based on what your current situation is . The first Medicare Part B enrollment period that most people experience is the `` Initial Enrollment Period '' . This is a 7 month window that starts 6 months before the first day of the month in which you turn 65 and lasts 6 months after the month in which you turn 65 . If you enroll in Part B using this enrollment period your medicare Part B will start on the first day of the month you turn 65 or if you enroll after your 65 birthday your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month . The Part B `` General Enrollment Period '' is for individuals over 65 that do not currently have medicare part B or other creditable health coverage . This period is from Jan 1st through march 31st every year . If you enroll in part B using this General Enrollment Period your Part B coverage will start on July 1st of the same year . There is also a `` Special Enrollment Period '' that begins 63 days before and ends 63 days after the date you lost creditable health coverage from an active employer . You may also qualify for an 8 month Enrollment period that begins on the day you lose employment and/or employment based group health coverage .
People typically go on Medicare Part A & B when they turn age 65 . From there , they decide on getting a Medicare Supplement or a Medicare Advantage plan to cover what Medicare Part A & B does not cover . If you are on a group plan from an employer you may be able to delay getting Part B until you retire . Some folks can go on to Medicare before age 65 if they have certain health issues .
Financial ratings really do n't matter when it comes to Medicare supplement insurance . All Medicare supplement plans are identical , and all pay claims on a timely basis . There are considerable consumer protections included in Medicare supplement plans . If your Medicare supplement carrier gets in financial trouble or decides to exit the market you have a `` free pass '' to apply for any plan with any other carrier , regardless of your health . The best Medicare supplemental insurance plan in your state is one that matches your needs and budget . Medigap insurance rates vary considerably by zip code , age , tobacco use and plan . The older you are the higher your Medicare supplement rate will be . The exception is for those who are under age 65 and on disability and Medicare . In most states rates for under age 65 are astronomical . Many carriers offer competitive rates from age 65 to 74 . Above age 74 some plans -LRB- surprisingly -RRB- become more competitive while others less so . Tobacco use often adds 20 % to the rate but can be more , depending on the carrier . Plan F is the most expensive -LRB- and most popular -RRB- followed by D or G -LRB- depending on your state -RRB- , N then Hi F which is the least expensive . You can generally find a site that offers `` instant Medigap quotes '' but keep in mind the most competitive rates are usually not illustrated online . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . If you arent yet 65 , you might also qualify for coverage if you have a disability or with End-Stage Renal disease -LRB- permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant -RRB- . Here are some simple guidelines . You can get Part A at age 65 without having to pay premiums if : You already get retirement benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . You are eligible to get Social Security or Railroad benefits but have n't yet filed for them . You or your spouse had Medicare-covered government employment . If you are under 65 , you can get Part A without having to pay premiums if you have : Received Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board disability benefits for 24 months . End-Stage Renal Disease and meet certain requirements . While you do not have to pay a premium for Part A if you meet one of these conditions , you must pay for Part B if you want it . The Part B monthly premium in 2013 is $ 104.90 per month . It is deducted from your Social Security , Railroad Retirement , or Civil Service Retirement check . If you dont get any of the above payments , Medicare sends you a bill for your Part B premium every 3 months . Note : You will be eligible for Medicare when you turn 65 even if you are not eligible for Social Security retirement benefits .
You can get Medicare at age 65 . If you have paid into Social Social Security taxes for at least 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- , your Medicare Part A will not have a monthly premium . If you miss the sign up date , there are times when you can sign up for Medicare past age 65 . Persons under 65 can get Medicare if they have been on Social Security Disability for two years , have end stage renal disease , or have Lou Gehrig 's disease .
You 're eligible for Medicare when you 're turning 65 years old . You can apply for Medicare benefits up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . I recommend applying during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of covered healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare B Cover Prescriptions ?
Medicare Part B does not cover prescriptions . Medicare Part A & B only covers about up to 80 % of the total costs of healthcare related charges . You can get a Medicare Supplement Plan to cover the co-insurance , deductibles and other expenses that Part A & B does not cover . In addition , you can get a Part D prescription drug plan to cover your prescriptions .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Medicare Part B does not cover prescriptions . Medicare Part A & B only covers about up to 80 % of the total costs of healthcare related charges . You can get a Medicare Supplement Plan to cover the co-insurance , deductibles and other expenses that Part A & B does not cover . In addition , you can get a Part D prescription drug plan to cover your prescriptions .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Medicare is a federal government-run health insurance program for individuals age 65 and older -LRB- and those on disability or have end-stage renal disease who are under age 65 -RRB- . It 's made up of 4 parts : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A - this is your hospital insurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B - this is your physician insurance 3 -RRB- Medicare Part C - also known as Medicare Advantage . This coverage is sold by private insurance companies and provides benefits equal to or greater than those provided by Medicare Part A and Part B . Some carriers offer prescription drug coverage with a Medicare Advantage plan 4 -RRB- Medicare Part D - this is your stand-alone prescription drug plan . This is also sold by private insurance companies and can be used with Medicare Parts A & B . Many individuals add a Medicare supplement plan to their Part A & B coverage to cover expenses Medicare does n't cover .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Azilect is a medication that is covered under Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . You have to be enrolled in Original Medicare to get a Part D plan . You can also enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- like an HMO or PPO -RRB- that includes Part D prescription drug coverage . Any drugs that are covered under Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- are ones that get administered in a doctor 's office -LRB- injections -RRB- , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , drugs used with some types of durable medical equipment -LRB- nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- . Sometimes drugs are covered under very limited circumstances -LRB- certain drugs in a hospital outpatient setting -RRB- . Since it falls under Part B , you pay the 20 % of Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . If you feel like you need help paying for your Medicare prescription drug costs , you can contact Social Security -LRB- 1-800-772-1213 -RRB- to apply for Extra Help . According to CMS , Extra Help is a `` Medicare program to help people with limited income and resources pay medicare prescription drug plan costs , like premiums , deductibles , and coinsurance . ''
In short , Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- pay for approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses - Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . The deductible for Part A in 2014 is $ 1,216 - $ 147 deductible for Part B . You are responsible for the other 20 % of your health care expenses . You can cover all or some of these expenses by securing a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- or a Medicare advantage plan . You MUST keep paying your premiums for your Original Medicare coverage under either scenario . Please note , Original Medicare does not cover prescription drugs . If you want to add prescription drug coverage , you 'll need to secure either a Medicare Advantage plan that includes drug coverage -LRB- MAPD plan -RRB- or a separate stand-alone part D prescription plan .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . An exception to this to have insulin covered under Part B is when insulin is administered via a medically necessary insulin pump - under this scenario , an external insulin pump and the insulin may be covered as durable medical equipment . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . If you 're looking for a Medigap plan or are interested in seeing if a lower rate is available compared to your existing plan -LRB- Medigap plans are standardized -RRB- , please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare covers the same basic health care in Massachusetts as in the rest of the country . Part A covers hospitalization , home health , hospice , and some nursing home care . Part B covers outpatient care , medical equipment , some therapy , some prescription drugs , and misc other services and items . Medicare Part D covers prescription drugs . Medicare supplement plans cover some of what Medicare Part A and B does not .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . Consult with an experienced Medigap broker to see which plan would be most suitable for your specific needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
No , Medicare Part A does not cover prescription drugs unless they are part of inpatient treatment in a hospital or skilled nursing care facility . A limited number of outpatient prescription drugs are covered by Medicare Part B , and most prescribed drugs are covered by Medicare Part D . A Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- also includes prescription drug coverage .
`` Original '' Medicare will cover SOME medications under Part B . As a general rule , infusion therapy , immunizations administered in your doctor 's office and most diabetic supplies -LRB- including insulin -RRB- may be covered under Part B. Most prescriptions filled on an outpatient basis by mail order or at a retail pharmacy are covered under Medicare Part D. Your Part D prescription drug plan is a separate benefit offered by private insurance carriers . The premium you pay will vary by zip code and the covered medications . Many Part D plans have an annual deductible that must be satisfied before brand name prescriptions are included with copay 's . Be sure to verify that the medications you take are included in your Part D drug formulary You can compare drug formulary 's at Medicare.gov by using the drug formulary prescription plan finder .
Medicare Part D is your prescription drug plan . It is a good idea to have a Part D plan in addition to a Medicare Supplement Plan . When someone turns 65 they go on Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B . They get Part D to cover prescriptions and a Medicare Supplement Plan to cover what Part A & B does not .
Medicare will cover anything wrong with your eyes medically -LRB- cataracts , glaucoma , macular degeneration , etc -RRB- . When you have your eyes examined Medicare does not cover the part of the exam called refraction to see if your prescription needs to be changed . My eye doctor charges $ 35 for refraction . Most of your eye exam will be covered by Medicare Part B , 80 % then the other 20 % if you have a Medicare Supplement . Medicare does not cover eyeglasses unless you are getting a new prescription as a result of cataract surgery .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can A Diabetic Get Disability Insurance ?
Yes , there are Disability Insurance policies that someone with diabetes can get . For persons with very well controlled diabetes , you will be rated up but may be able to get a 2 to 5 year benefit . If you are unable to get that type of policy , there are graded Disability policies that some people with diabetes can get . These pay a limited benefit during the first couple years . Contact a broker for Disability insurance to make sure you have access to all the choices available to you .
Most people with diabetes can get life insurance . Children with type 1 diabetes are the notable exception ; it is very difficult to find a policy for them until they are at least age 18 . All the more reason to add your children to a child rider or get them a policy of their own while they are very young , especially if diabetes runs in the family . The types of policies that you can get while having diabetes , are as varied as the persons with type 1 , 1.5 , 2 , or gestational diabetes . Underwriters will look at your history of control , with A1C being the dominant indicator , but also at whether you have current complications such as neuropathy , heart disease , or kidney disease . They will look at your age of diagnosis , the length of time you have had diabetes , and the types of treatments you have had . Based on all this data , the insurance company will determine how to rate you . People with diabetes can be rated Preferred all the way to a high table rating . If your blood glucose is too high or you have too many complications to get a medically underwritten policy , there are simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies available for most people . Contact an impaired risk life insurance specialist with experience in life insurance for people with diabetes , to be sure that you get placed with a company that will approve you at the best possible rate .
Most people with diabetes can get life insurance , and if you have had a history of good control -LRB- low A1C 's , no protein in urine , no neuropathy -RRB- you can get any type of medically underwritten policy at reasonable rates . Even if you have had some recent periods of poor control or have some side effects of diabetes , there are policies available . This is true even with the combination of diabetes and heart disease , which used to be pretty much uninsurable . There are a few groups who can have a difficult time finding coverage . Children with type 1 diabetes will most likely need to wait until they are adults to qualify for a policy . Persons under age 50 who have very serious side effects -LRB- amputation , kidney dialysis , blindness -RRB- may need to wait until they are older until they can get a guaranteed issue policy . To get your most affordable diabetes life insurance rate , contact an agency that specializes in that and share your health details . There is something out there for nearly every person with diabetes , and by shopping with a broker who carries many options , you can lock in your lowest price based on your particular health details .
Yes , there are Disability Insurance policies that someone with diabetes can get . For persons with very well controlled diabetes , you will be rated up but may be able to get a 2 to 5 year benefit . If you are unable to get that type of policy , there are graded Disability policies that some people with diabetes can get . These pay a limited benefit during the first couple years . Contact a broker for Disability insurance to make sure you have access to all the choices available to you .
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have diabetes ? Well , I want to ask some questions first . Has there been any weight change , ten pounds or more , all within the last year ? What is the reason for that change ? When were you diagnosed with diabetes ? Are you controlling your diabetes through diet and exercise ? Are you using all medications ? Are you using insulin ? Has the insured or the person that 's looking for this , had any chest pains or coronary artery disease ? Remember sometimes diabetes with weight and these other ancillary diseases , can complicate it . We call that '' `` multiple impairments . '' '' So , if I can start to answer some of these basic questions , is it diabetes 1 ? Is it diabetes 2 ? Is it controlled by diet and exercise ? Is it controlled by insulin ? Was it adult onset ? I can get a good idea just with this questionnaire , to what kind of offer we can give from life insurance companies that are benevolent towards diabetics .
Diabetics can get Long Term Care Insurance under some conditions . They key for people with diabetes to getting Long Term Care Insurance , Disability Insurance , or Life Insurance is diabetic CONTROL . If you have a history of A1C under 8 and no side effects from your diabetes , getting a traditional long term care policy is possible . However , some LTC policies do exclude the use of insulin , regardless of control .
Using a life insurance agency that specializes in `` impaired risk '' life insurance is a good way to make sure that you are getting the best possible diabetic life insurance rate . One 's method of diabetic treatment , history of A1C 's , age at diagnosis , whether there are complications from diabetes , weight , tobacco use , and having additional health conditions all have a huge bearing on what medically underwritten policy the person with diabetes can qualify for , and how much he/she will pay . Having specialized in diabetic life insurance for over 10 years , I have found that there are no simple rules or tricks for getting someone the best price . You really have to know what you are doing . If just looking for a small policy with no exam , there are also lots of choices , and again , diabetic control can make a big difference in what you policy you qualify for and what price you will pay . It is very difficult to sift through all that without the assistance of an experienced , impaired risk life insurance agent who is able to shop a number of carriers to find you the most affordable diabetes life insurance rate .
It is possible for diabetics to get disability insurance , but the diabetes must be very well controlled and meet certain criteria . To get a quote for disability insurance while having diabetes , contact a broker of disability insurance that offers a large variety of policies , so that you may be able to find one that fits your health .
Yes , some people with diabetes can now get life insurance . When I started 25 years ago , diabetes was an automatic decline . As time has gone by , insurance companies have discovered the wide range of people within the class of diabetics . Some are very healthy and have good control of their blood sugars . Others may lack any control over their blood sugars . Most agents ask to pre underwrite diabetics to get underwriters to review on a individual basis , so no blanket declines anymore . If you 're a diabetic with good control , chances are you can find a fairly priced product from several carriers . If your control is OK , you 'll find something as well . Price may be more than you thought but you can get coverage instead of a `` no '' .
People with diabetes can get life insurance , and if they have a history of good diabetic control , they can get any type of policy that they want . If A1C 's run over 9 or there is significant neuropathy or kidney damage , there are simplified policies available to them that may or may not be graded . To get the most affordable diabetic life insurance rate , contact a specialist in diabetes life insurance and share all the information that you are asked . With the right guidance , you can get placed with the right product from the start and not have to go through needless frustration or declines .
What does it mean to be rated for life insurance ? Being rated means you have a health condition that does n't exclude you from coverage -LRB- declined -RRB- , but ads additional cost to the policy . Also known as `` table rated '' a person could be rated along a range of levels -LRB- tables -RRB- for an illness depending on their individual situation . A great example of table rating is diabetes . When I started 25 years ago , Diabetics were a straight decline for life insurance . No chance . Over the years , as treatment and severity of Diabetes changed , came a `` range '' of health levels that Diabetics can display . There are diabetics who have become healthier than the general population and there are Diabetics who every day struggle with control of thier illness . The insurance industry has figured out these two are not the same individuals health wise . A person with well controlled diabetes may fall into normal class range or low table rates , while a person with less control of their diabetes would be higher on the tabe rates .
Can you get life insurance with diabetes ? Yes , you can get life insurance but the cost is going to depend on how well your control of your diabetes actually is . When I started 25 years ago , diabetes was a quick decline . With the changes in medicine and treatment , diabetes is looked upon on a more individual basis . In other words your good health lowers your cost .
Yes , it may be possible to get life insurance with diabetes . In the old days diabetes was a decline , not even considered . Now most companies will look at an individual 's situation with diabetes to determine an offer . One thing though , once you start taking medications to treat your diabetes , you are a diabetic . Type II for 15 years myself .
Diabetes does affect life insurance rates , but how much diabetes affects life insurance depends on the level of diabetic control . More than whether you are type 1 or type 2 , whether you use oral med or use insulin , whether you were diagnosed at age 10 or diagnosed at age 50 , your A1C number matters . If it is over 10 , the amount of life insurance you can get will be limited and the price will be very high . If under 8 , a person with diabetes can get affordable rates , even though higher than someone who has no health issues whatsoever .
There are many companies that will underwrite a diabetic these days . A few decades ago a diabetic was a straight decline . Times have changed , there is a broad range of diabetics who have great control to very poor . Diabetics are reviewed on an individual basis to give opportunty for those diabetics who have good control a chance to get the best possible premium . I would suggest finding an independent agent who has access to several companies and do a pre-underwriting questionnaire . That way your information can be presented to several underwriters at different companies and the results come back to you to choose from . There is a significant advantage in this method over a single carrier agent .
Can you get life insurance if you are diabetic ? Yes , you can , but a diabetic with excellent control at best could expect to pay a standard premium . While that sounds bad or not fair , when I began my insurance career 25 years ago the answer to this question was simply `` no '' . It has only been recent that insurance carriers began to offer policies to diabetics as diabetes is so unpredictable risk wise .
Yes , type 1 diabetics can get life insurance , and sometimes a person with type 1 diabetes will have an easier time finding affordable coverage than a person with poorly controlled type 2 diabetes . With good control and no side effects , type 1 diabetes life insurance can be issued in a policy that pays 100 % from day one and has no limit on the face amount .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
Type 1 diabetics can getMedicare . Type 2 diabetics can get Medicare . If there was a type 3 diabetic , they could also get Medicare . Re Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , during an Open Enrollment , you can also purchase a plan regardless of your pre-existing conditions . So obviously , that 's the time to buy a Medigap plan if you are in poor health .
People with diabetes can get life insurance , and there are some ways that you can help yourself get the best price . I made this video for DiabetesDaily.com , a consumer group that supports and educates person with diabetes . It is worth the time to view when looking for the most affordable diabetes life insurance . WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is A Whole Life Insurance Policy A Good Investment ?
No form of life insurance should be considered an investment . The purpose of the product is to provide a survivor benefit at the lowest possible cost . It happens to do that extremely well . The cash value is an added benefit . It can be made available in a very short time and at a very low cost . But the removal of this cash can impact the amount of the survivor benefit . People need to understand that before they start taking money out of their policy . If the policyholder does know how to manage the policy , then a cash value policy can be a very attractive source of retirement money , college funding , emergency funds , and so on . Whole life would have an advantage over other cash value policies in that it provides extremely strong guarantees .
Whole Life insurance is not an investment , it is a way to provide an immediate estate and a systematic way to save money in a very tax favorable way . Whole life provides a sound foundation for a good investment portfolio . The amount of the Whole Life would depend on your personal goals and financial situation . While buy term and invest the difference is a great idea , the reality is that most people who buy term never follow through on investing the difference . Life happens , emergencies come up and the money that was to be invested gets used for other things . This is fact based on statistics . If you want to invest , invest . If you want insurance that will be there when you will need it most , buy Whole Life insurance . Never put all your eggs in one basket . A base of Whole Life with added term insurance for your life insurance needs and sound investments to top off the portfolio is a safe sound way to accumulate cash for retirement and providing for final expense and a legacy for your family
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
Why invest in whole life insurance ? Well it is one of the few insurance products that you actually control , not the insurance carrier . That is a big reason why whole life insurance is expensive compared to other life products . The insurance company bears the risk of the contract as they can not alter or change the terms of the contract , they can not raise the price of the policy in later years and must receive the policy owners permission to do anything to the policy . What a whole life offers is a decent return for the safety it provides the policy holder . There is very little investment risk to a whole life policy compared to other places where a person can put money . This also is reflected in the return . If you had money invested in 2008 you learned first hand about investment risk . That said , while the rest of my investments were losing 40 % my whole life gained value . You ca n't go backwards with a whole life which makes it a good part of anybody 's planning . I call whole life the most boring investment a person can make . Why ? it does what it says it will do .
Whole Life insurance is not an investment , it is a way to provide an immediate estate and a systematic way to save money in a very tax favorable way . Whole life provides a sound foundation for a good investment portfolio . The amount of the Whole Life would depend on your personal goals and financial situation . While buy term and invest the difference is a great idea , the reality is that most people who buy term never follow through on investing the difference . Life happens , emergencies come up and the money that was to be invested gets used for other things . This is fact based on statistics . If you want to invest , invest . If you want insurance that will be there when you will need it most , buy Whole Life insurance . Never put all your eggs in one basket . A base of Whole Life with added term insurance for your life insurance needs and sound investments to top off the portfolio is a safe sound way to accumulate cash for retirement and providing for final expense and a legacy for your family
Is Northwestern Mutual whole Life a good investment ? Well it depends on your needs . Your needs are what make any choice a good or bad investment . First Northwestern Mutual is a very highly rated fiscally strong company , as many others are . Using Whole life as an investment does work as part of an overall investment strategy as it provides a safe place to accumulate money as well as protecting your other plans . What you will find is whole life insurance is the most boring investment product out there . It 's not exciting , it 's not racy , it 's not an up and down product . It is a slow safe and secure place to put money out there . It 's boring because it does what it says it will do . I have owned whole life for almost 30 years and it has never let me down . Ca n't say the same about my real estate or stock market investments during that same window of time . Oh , last thing to keep it short . Whole life cash values do n't go backwards . You ca n't lose it once it 's there .
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
Whether whole life is a good investment or not depends on how you define a good investment . That being said , it can be a good investment when you look at it closely . Life insurance creates cash at death and whole life is designed to be in force when you die , not if you die within a specified term From an estate planning point of view , that is a good thing , If you need insurance coverage , then the tax advantaged growth of a participating whole life policy can be attractive from a wealth accumulation point of view.The funds can , among other things , be used to supplement retirement income . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The purpose of whole life insurance is to provide guarantees . You know what ? It does a very good job at this . Guarantees are a godsend in a financial world in which cycles and ups and downs and cost increases are the norm . Its nice to have a product you can truly count on . These guarantees come in three delicious flavors : Flavor number one : a guaranteed premium . As you get older , your price stays the same . As it costs more for the company to insure you , your price stays the same . If the company has a bad investment year , or two , or three , your price stays the same . Thats good . But theres more . Flavor number two : a guaranteed death benefit . You see all those variables mentioned in number one above that could affect your price but dont ? They could also affect your death benefit . But they dont . Neither your age , nor their increasing cost , nor their poor investment performance can reduce the benefit you were leaving to your heirs . That is really good . But we have one last delicious flavor : Flavor number three : a guaranteed cash accumulation . Do yourself a favor and compare the guaranteed growth of cash inside a good whole life contract with other so-called guaranteed investments out there . You will notice that whole life basically beats the pants off the competition in this regard . Of course , you always have to be wise about taking money out of life insurance , and make sure you dont reduce your death benefit to an undesirable amount . But given that , whole life can make a real valuable contribution to the conservative portion of your financial portfolio .
I am going to answer this question as someone who sells whole life and universal life only . I do not sell variable life insurance , which is typically considered an investment . First of all , I think the word `` investment '' does not really apply to life insurance , regardless of the type of product . This is because life insurance is first and foremost intended to provide a benefit to survivors . Any cash it develops is nice to have , but it is secondary . The first priority in buying life insurance should be getting the most attractive premium for the entire time you need coverage . Even with very aggressive underwriting , that cost can be higher than the costs associated with conventional investment products . Now , life insurance does have specific tax advantages . These include tax-deferred cash accumulation , and income-tax free benefits . You should speak with your tax advisor for more details . If the insured is young enough , and qualifies for a low enough rate , and is in a high-enough tax bracket , then the cost of his life insurance might be lower than the taxes he would pay on an investment outside life insurance . Here life insurance may be considered a smart `` investment . '' In most other cases , life insurance would not be a smart investment . But , with a strong product from a strong company , the guaranteed cash value in a whole life or universal life product could be significant . You could get more bang for your buck inside life insurance that you would from a standard conservative investment . For that reason , people do use life insurance as the guaranteed or conservative part of their financial portfolio .
Good question and here 's the blanket answer : YES ! Life insurance is like buying future money at a big discount . However the type of life insurance and subsequent events play a big part in just how good the investment turns out . For example if you buy a Term policy and you do n't die before the term expires you 've only benefited the insurance company . Good investment for THEM . If you buy a Whole Life policy with a Mutual company that pays dividends then it is the safest , surest investment available to grow your wealth tax-free ! Every seminar I 've attended , the speakers have all said that their whole life policies have been their best investments because they have no downside risk and just continue to grow their cash value and without having to pay taxes on the gains .
Lets begin by defining what is an investment ? In the broadest sense of the word , an investment is when you place money or time into something in expectation of a return on that investment . To that end whole life insurance can serve the purpose of being an investment in that money is invested into it for an expected end . There are a lot of factors that can make an investment bad such as it loses money , it has a low rate of return or it offers no return at all . What makes an investment good or bad is to know what you expect it to return to you . If you want an insurance policy that offers a guaranteed death benefit and has cash value , then a whole life policy may work for you . Define what you want first and then find the vehicle that takes you where you want to go .
Is whole life ever a good idea ? Absolutely , for those who understand it 's application and use , it makes great sense . For those who always want to compare it to a stock mutual fund that never ever does anything but go up , well , it shows that they really do n't have a good understanding of how RISK applies to financial choices . I own whole life for many years now . It has served me well , done what I have expected it to do and even better it has never gone backwards like my qualified plan investments have or my real estate investments have . Whole life insurance is a solidly boring financial product that serves a good purpose in a portfolio . It is part of a portfolio , a boring part , but if you 've been around long enough and put money in different places , you 'll understand the need to have something like whole life . Some choices should n't keep you up at night .
Definitely , despite what some misinformed advisers may tell you . Whole Life first of all was never designed as an investment . While it is true you can accumulate more cash by buying term and investing the difference , my experience has shown that in most cases the average person , no matter how well intentioned , fails to keep up with the investment part . Investments are taxable as well whereas Whole Life is very tax friendly . I have seen many people in their 70 's and 80 's lose their life savings because of the high cost of long term care . Without life insurance they would have had nothing to help pay for the final expenses , leaving their families in a financial bind . For some people the cash value in their life insurance is the only savings they really have . I always recommend at least enough whole life to pay final expenses , allowing for inflation . If purchased at a young age it is not that expensive . After forming your insurance foundation , then you can begin accumulating cash using a combination of term and investments . Whole life insurance provides an excellent safety net for the average individual .
That is a great question ! Like all investments , for some the investment is the greatest thing since sliced bread , and for others that same investment is like a tack in your shoe . Life insurance is really not an investment per se , as it is n't going to make you any money ; it will pay to your beneficiary , and you will receive none of it , as you wo n't be here . Many people are led to think of life insurance as an investment in that sense , but it truly is n't . It is an investment in peace of mind , you are assured that your family will be provided for when you pass and your whole life policy pays them . But other than leaving a chunk of tax free money behind , you are n't going to see any returns from your policy . If you have large amounts of money laying around that you can pass on to your loved ones tax free and probate safe , you do n't need life insurance at all . If you do n't , then a whole life policy is a good `` investment '' in the protection of your family , and in your peace of mind . I hope that helps , please feel free to contact me with any questions that you may have , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Is Whole life insurance worth buying ? Well the answer is going to vary by the individual as people see worth differently . To me a decades old owner of whole life , all I can do is tell you why I purchased whole life . I liked the idea of owning the policy with a set price that can not be changed . I liked the terms of ownership did n't or could n't be changed over time . I like the steady boring returns to cash values that these policies produced . While my real estate , stock market and other investments have gone up and down , in many cases very dramatically , my boring whole life has done what it said it would . My whole life has NEVER gone backwards in value , it grows in good markets and bad ones . Is whole life the only thing you should purchase , well no . A good portfolio is a diverse portfolio . Whole life should be a part of it , but not all of it . Owning a whole life allows you to take risks elsewhere as you have a safety net .
Is life insurance a good investment ? Well , it depends on if it fits your risk profile . I consider whole life insurance to be a part of my investment plan as whole life insurance offers a safe rate of return , ca n't go backwards in a down market and protects my family if I die before retirement . My whole life actually protects in retirement as when I die . That said , you will find whole life is absolutely the most boring financial product ever . Simply it does what it says it 's going to do , with no surprises along the way . Other investments shoot up , shoot down , stay flat and even fail . All which makes for great conversations over a beer . Life insurance ? Well , very few people brag about steady .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole life insurance is never an investment let alone a `` good '' investment . Life insurance should always be separate from your investment portfolio and this will not only give you a much better rate of return on your investment but more flexibility in you investment options . This is why term life insurance makes better sense then invest outside of that .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Insurance Companies Offer Short Term Disability Insurance ?
The insurance companies that offer individual short term disability policies are Mutual of Omaha and Assurity Life , according to a Disability Insurance broker that we use for our DI requests . There are many more companies that offer individual long term disability policies than there are that offer short term disability .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can get Short Term Disability insurance from agencies that sell Disability Insurance , and who carry Disability products from Assurity Life Insurance Company and Mutual of Omaha Insurance Company . These companies offer the purchase of private , Short Term Disability policies . Other than that , you could get Short Term Disability coverage from your place of work , if they offer it as a group benefit .
There is a huge inventory of disability insurance companies that carry short term disability and some short term disability group plans for business . Before purchasing short term disability insurance , make sure your employer does n't offer it . Here are a few on short term disability companies that come to mind Mutual of Omaha , Aflac , Lincoln Financial Group .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Short term disability insurance is paycheck protection in case of a disability event . And many consumers can only afford short term disability versus long term disability coverage . Mutual of Omaha is a major carrier in short term disability insurance . Keep in mind that you may have short term disability insurance through your employers group benefit plan . You also have Social Security disability insurance , although benefits may be limited .
Short Term disability Insurance pays a percentage of your salary if you become temporarily disabled , meaning that you are not able to work for a short period of time due to a sickness or injury -LRB- excluding on-the-job-injuries , which are covered by workers compensation insurance -RRB- . A typical short-term disability insurance policy provides you with 40 to 65 percent of your pre-disability base salary , according to the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners estimates that these benefits generally last between three to six months . Most short-term disability insurance policies have a `` cap '' , meaning you receive a maximum benefit amount per month . Short-term disability insurance policies also have a limit on the amount of times that you can receive benefits-up to two years , according to the Insurance Information Institute . .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Most financial advisers recommend getting Long Term Disability over Short Term Disability because more people can survive a short period of being without income , rather than a long term period . Also , Long Term Disability Insurance is easier to get , with more companies offering it . And Short Term Disability Insurance is offered more commonly in the workplace .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
Before shopping for short term disability insurance , first determine if your employer 's group benefit plan offers it . If your an executive or key person in the company , you may ask for short term disability insurance to be added to your compensation package . Short term disability benefits usually is designed for two years . Short term disability is paycheck protection against illness or injury recovery .
Disability insurance is offered as short term disability , generally two years , and long term disability , generally to age 65 . The elimination or waiting period needs to be established on the basis of your cash reserves . And keep in mind that many employer sponsored group plans include short term disability coverage . Having short term disability coverage may allow you to purchase long term disability coverage with a longer elimination period .
There are online outlets for short term disability but before you start shopping for short term disability insurance , find out if your employer sponsored group plan offers it . Many of these types of plans offer short term disability insurance as part of the overall employee benefits.But if you have to shop , start online with brokerage outlets that specialize or have complete departments dedicated to disability insurance . Most of these firms have access to a wide range of carriers that can spread sheet the players in disability insurance .
The insurance companies that offer individual short term disability policies are Mutual of Omaha and Assurity Life , according to a Disability Insurance broker that we use for our DI requests . There are many more companies that offer individual long term disability policies than there are that offer short term disability .
AARP does not offer any type of insurance - they are only a marketing organization . If you 're looking for short-term disability coverage , it can be secured in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- your employer -LRB- if they offer short-term disability insurance -RRB- 2 -RRB- an individual policy purchased through an insurance company If your employer offers it , it would likely be issued on a guaranteed-issue basis and not require any medical underwriting -LRB- assuming several factors such as size of group , etc. -RRB- . If you 're going to secure it through an insurance company , you will want to consult with an independent agent who has a strong background in disability insurance and can compare multiple companies for your . As disability insurance is a much more customizable type of coverage than other lines of insurance , it 's important to look at the details of available policies closely -LRB- e.g. what the requirements are that need to be met for a claim to be approved , the definition of disability under the policy , etc. -RRB- . Not all short-term policies are the same so it 's important to look at the programs beyond just the price . If you 'd like help with securing coverage , please send me a message via the contact me button next to my name and include your name and number . There is an agent in my group with an extensive knowledge of disability programs I can put you in touch with . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can use Group Short Term Disability Insurance for maternity leave . This is only available though employers who offer it . Some states mandate that employers offer Group Short Term Disability , but most do not mandate it . Unfortunately , private Short Term Disability can only be used for complications of pregnancy . Long Term Disability does pick up when complications cause loss of work beyond the policy 's elimination period .
Short Term Disability Insurance is usually provided through one 's place of employment . There are only a few companies that sell individually owned short term life insurance policies . You can purchase short term disability insurance through Life or Disability Insurance brokers who offer a whole range of disability insurance products .
Short term disability insurance pays a percentage of your salary for a specified amount of time if you are ill or injured and can not perform the duties of your occupation . Please note , you may be required to use up your sick days -LRB- if applicable -RRB- before your short term disability coverage will start making payments . If you have short term coverage , you may want to consider supplementing it with long termdisabilityinsurance as many people who need to use their short term disability coverage will often be unable to work for longer than the short term plan allows . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your disability insurance program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does A Life Insurance Physical Consist Of ?
A trained , professional paramedical examiner performs the exam in your home or office . This routine exam will include taking information about your medical history , height , weight , collecting a urine specimen for urinalysis , blood pressure , pulse and collecting a blood sample . The exam will take about 45 minutes or less . If additional testing is required by the insurance company such as an electrocardiogram -LRB- ECG -RRB- or a chest xray , you will be notified in advance . We recommend scheduling the appointment at the least stressful time of day for you . Blood pressure can be artificially raised by stress . It can also be raised by caffeine , tobacco and alcohol so avoid these for several hours prior . Limit salt intake and rich foods for 24 hours prior to the exam . Fasting for 4-8 hours prior to the exam is also advised -LRB- and may be required -RRB- but drink plenty of water . Finally , avoid strenuous physical activities for 24 hours prior to the exam .
It 's going to depend on the age of the applicant , the face amount applied for and the company providing the insurance . In the most basic cases , the exam involves meeting with a medical examiner and going over health history , checking height and weight , blood pressure reading , blood and urine samples . For older applicants a `` resting '' ECG may be taken . For very large cases a full physical taken at a medical facility may be necessary , but this is only when a large face amount of coverage was involved .
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
Short-term health insurance is the cheapest type of medical coverage available to individuals and families . Rates are typically 40 % -75 % less than conventional coverage , although you can not receive a federal subsidy and temporary plans are not ACA-compliant . Also , pre-existing conditions are not covered . As an experienced broker , we help consumers with their short-term policy comparisons each day . Our top-rated websites allow customers to view rates in moments , and easily apply online for coverage . Comparing and finding the cheapest prices takes less than two minutes . Typically , within 24 hours , you are approved for a period of 1-12 months , depending on which time-period you selected . Often , UnitedHealthcare , Blue Cross and a few smaller carriers offer the most competitive rates . Underwriting is simple , consisting of a short application , but no physicals and few medical questions .
What is the best retirement investment plan ? The best is the one that you will actually DO . A plan does n't matter if the person does not create the habit of consistent funding of the plan . The best retirement plan is actually the discipline to save . It does n't matter as much where a person does this as it does that they actually save . `` Best '' after creating the habit of saving is the plan that fits your `` risk '' tolerance , which is different in each person .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test If you 're an older individuals -LRB- e.g. age 55 -RRB- , some carriers may also ask for an EKG to be completed with the other exam requirements . If you 're a senior -LRB- e.g. age 70 -RRB- , some carriers may ask you to complete a mature assessment -LRB- congnitive and physical movement testing - e.g. memory tests , walk a distance , etc. -RRB- . Exams typically take no more than a half hour or so and can be completed in the privacy of your own home -LRB- some people prefer their work place which is also acceptable -RRB- . You do n't have to go to a doctor 's office or a clinic to have the exams done . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . Please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I suggest you start by listing all the insurance you are now buying ; auto , tenants or home insurance , health , disability , life , etc. . The list should include a basic outline of the coverage , the insurer or agent and the annual premium . The information on this list may point you in the right direction . I would first consider insurers/agents you are currently doing business with if you are at all satisfied with them.If not , maybe you should be looking for more than just home insurance . Request limits , coverage and deductibles consistent with what you currently purchase.If you have all-risk coverage on your car -LRB- comprehensive and collision -RRB- , I would suggest considering all-risk coverage on your home and other personal property you own . If you have $ 300,000 liability limits on your car , you may want to consider similar limits on your home . Deductibles should be consistent whether they are car , home or medical and represent the amount of risk you are willing and can afford to assume . Features I like to see in home policies include : All-risk * coverage on the home AND personal property , GUARANTEED Replacement cost of your home , consistent liability limits and deductibles . In some locals , you have to be concerned with the perils of Flood , earthquake , sinkhole damage and wind as standard policies limit coverage in these areas . It 's common to look for the least expensive policy but it 's also important to have the RIGHT policy . An insurance policy is just a very expensive piece of paper until you happen to need it .
How does one plan for retirement ? First thing is to make the decision to set aside today 's dollars for a future use . You have to decide to make the commitment to set aside funds , leave them alone while growing and consistently contribute to this future goal . This means living on less to today , so you can live with more tomorrow . Once you 've made that commitment to yourself , it is good to find an investment professional that will explain your options and the choices in front of you . Avoid the one trick pony advisors who beat one and one choice only into your head . There are many ways to get there . The goal is to consistently save in one or more choices to get you there .
There are a number of features I look for in home insurance coverage but my main objective is to have a balanced insurance program . Usually homeowners also own vehicles , have some form of health insurance , life insurance and even disability insurance . Home insurance should be consistent with other coverage you purchase . And it is not a bad idea to combine coverage with the same insurer whenever possible . Its better to deal with someone you already know if you trust them than a stranger simply trying to sell you something . I like to see all-risk * coverage on your home and your personal property . Most policies provide only limited coverage on personal property . I like insuring agreements that say , Any accidental direct damage is covered unless specifically excluded or limited . An insurance policy is easier to understand if you know what you are not covered for . Perils like flood , wind , earthquake and sinkholes may deserve special consideration in certain areas . Id also watch for limitations on certain property like jewelry and silver . I like to see guaranteed replacement cost coverage on the structure and replacement cost on personal property . Deductibles and liability limits should be consistent with those you purchase on your cars .
Great question ! In almost every case , your premium payment should be agreed upon before you sign for the policy . There are some cases where the companies underwriters need some time to investigate an determine whether you will qualify , and what the premium will be , but in most cases you should have a very good idea up front what you are paying , and what your coverage will consist of . If your agent does n't make these things clear to you , politely decline , and go get another agent , one who will make everything understandable . If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Whole life insurance is excellent . Question to you , the reader : have your investments -LRB- Stocks , bonds , funds , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , whatever -RRB- grown , and if so , in a straight line ? Those down years really rip apart the fabric of `` buy-term-and-invest-the-difference '' , do n't they ? A poorly understood function within the insurance-sales arena is/are the actual workings of whole life . To be sure , there are different types and qualities -LRB- and features -RRB- within the category of whole life ; but a good Mutual company , with a strong rating , structure and history can be your best friend . The premiums you pay -LRB- many balk at the size -RRB- go to both the cost of the death benefit , and also to a growing cash value , and the policy grows -LRB- in both death benefit and cash value -RRB- over time . Once the cash is in the policy -LRB- year-after-year -RRB- , the only way it goes down -LRB- for example , in a down market -RRB- is if you do something to change it . The consistency of earnings offered within these has an extremely important result in your financial planning . Further , the cash is accessible to you , while you 're alive , in a tax-beneficial way ! Next question to you : Do you understand `` arithmetic average '' ? That is used by Wall Street to glorify results of investments . Down markets and negative results eat up your cash . All of us are going into the `` distribution phase '' of our lives at some point . The money we have in our accounts will be used for our retirement , distributed as we need it . It is very important to recognize the difference in results now , and especially what it will mean for us later ... volatility is not your friend , `` meaningful '' consistency is . Last question : Do you want the life insurance to be there when you die ? Whole Life insurance is permanent , and will be .
Annuity withdrawals from a non-registered immediate or payout annuity consist of an interest portion and a return of capital portion . In Canada , you are not taxed on the return of capital portion , but you are taxed on the interest portion . Think of annuities as the opposite of a mortgage . In a 25 year mortgage , early payments consist of mostly interest with little going towards the principle . With an annuity , the early payments you receive are mostly taxable interest and a little of your own principle . For those individuals who can qualify , a prescribed annuity equalizes the interest income . For example , with a 25 year annuity the total interest earned is divided by 25 and spread out equally over the term of the contact . Increased after tax income in the early years is the result . There are specific rules governing prescribed annuities , If you are interested in more information , please contact me . Income from a payout annuity may qualify for income splitting for income tax purposes . This allows you to transfer up to 50 % of the taxable income earned from the payout annuity . Missing out on the federal pension income income tax credit ? Income from a payout annuity may qualify for the $ 2,000 non-refundable tax credit . Note : Interest earned on a Guaranteed Investment Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also may qualify . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Risk and Return possibilities . Or visa versa . What I will do is list my thoughts on Variable life and you can decide if it 's a pro or a con to having a VUL . Requires consistent steady review by insured . Requires rebalancing over time . Requires the insured to make investment choices and live with the results . Requires the insured to have financial knowledge about mutual funds . Requires the insured to have an understanding of financial risk . So depending about how you feel about the requirements as they can be either pro or con , depending on the individual , should determine how you feel about a VUL as a choice . While it is easy to reference `` potential for greater returns '' that does n't say anything about how to get greater returns , those requirements listed put you on track for greater returns , but that said , it does n't guarantee greater returns .
By IRS definition Life Insurance Dividends are considered a return of `` unused premium '' and not subject to income tax as they have already been taxed going in as premium . Mutual companies pay dividends to policyholders as they have no stockholders as owners of the company . The permanent policyholders -LRB- not term , not universal life policyholders -RRB- are considered the owners of the company and dividends are applied to their whole life policies . A dividend for a mutual life insurance company is a combination of investment return , positive mortality experience -LRB- fewer deaths than expected -RRB- and operating expense savings and what is held as surplus by the company . Money beyond what the company needs or projects is returned to whole life policyholders in that form of a dividend . The surplus is what protects the company if for some reason they goof . Most mutual companies have been paying dividends consistently for more than a century .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
For a home Insurance quote usually the agent can pull most info off of the assesor site for your county , usually what is mainly needed is what the customer considers market value , personal belongiongs , any special additions you have added , the most recent roof year , name , DOB , address , if you have been cancelled prior or had prior losses , what the floors consist of , as well as the inside and outside walls , garage type , basement condition/status .
The choice to purchase a whole life insurance policy from a strong company like guardian is a good one as it is part of a strong financial plan . While life insurance is `` life insurance '' it is also a safe consistent place to build cash values over time . While a cash value life insurance policy will never beat that mythical 12 % forever return mutual fund you read so much about , yet can never seem to find in reality , it wo n't keep you up at night worrying if it will be there tomorrow . Usually when people speak aobut investment and comparing one choice vs. another , they tend to grow thick between the ears about RISK . Does a cash value life insurance policy share the same risk/reward aspects of a pacific rim energy fund ? Not even close . Which will keep you up at night ? Not even close . Cash value life insurance can be part of a solid financial plan . Not the only thing , but a safey net that allows the investor to assume risk in other areas and potentially acheive greater gains . It was n't that long ago that most investments lost ten years value in a few months . Mine did . Except for my cash value life insurance as once earned , it ca n't go backwards . Sometimes it 's what you get to keep rather than how fast or slow it comes to you .
What is the best retirement plan ? Anyone you happen to choose and consistently fund . There are a lot of `` prefect '' plans that go undone or unfunded or left as a last thing to do if there 's money left over ... . The habit of saving is the absolute BEST retirement plan a person can have ... Get the habit and the rest turns out OK . Without the habit , tax breaks , tax advantages and tax free does n't matter .
What is a variable universal life policy ? A VUL is a type of universal life policy that has it 's investment pool in the stock market . Universal life normally consists of an insurance account and an investment account that make up the guts of the policy . Any funds collected above the cost of insurance are deposited in the investment account . Later on , those funds are used to help reduce the actual cost of insurance as Universal life is basically term insurance with an investment account . Variable UL is simply the same thing except the investment account is now based in market securities -LRB- usually mutual funds -RRB- which present the opportunity of higher returns . Be aware with the higher returns there also comes greater risk . A VUL should never be purchased and forgotten about . Chances are it wo n't be there if that 's what the purchaser does . A VUL requires oversight and adjustments over time to get the best use out of it .
Of course , surfing the internet is a great general way to start to narrow your search . Look for Insurance Companies that are consistently rated very high among the financial rating services such as A M Best , Moody and the like . Next , talk to your Insurance Professional about what options you may have . Independent agents can offer an array of companies , of course , but understand that they can not offer products and services that offer their solutions only through their agents . In most cases , for example , an independent agent does not have access to Nationwide Insurance Company products . Ultimately it is up to you to decide which solution best suits your needs and budget .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Life Insurance Does Dave Ramsey Recommend ?
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Dave Ramsey recommends having eight to ten times your income in term life insurance . There are a number of life insurance carriers that offer the term life insurance products that Dave Ramsey recommends , and those products can be purchased on many different websites on the internet ... the price is the same for the same product .
Most financial celebrities and entertainers tend to recommend term insurance for its low cost . As a class , they usually vilify all forms of permanent life insurance and the agents and advisors who offer them . They almost always suggest that you can invest the difference between the cost of term and permanent and come out ahead . I 've never heard any of them take taxes , liquidity , risk , shielding from creditors , etc into consideration .
I have read one of Dave Ramseys books but I am certainly not an expert . I think Dave Ramsey would say to have the amount of life insurance that you need in place when the need arises . A policy that has expired or is inadequate defeats the purpose of life insurance . While I realize that Dave Ramsey advocates term insurance , the key remains the same . Make sure you have enough when the need arises . If you investments reduce your risk and need for life insurance , that is fine but make sure that you have the risk covered . You are valuable and you love people who will be hurt terribly if you dont make it home today .
Dave Ramsey recommends term life insurance to protect your family during your working years . His strategy is to pay off all debt including your mortgage and invest in mutual funds . His premise basically states that your debt should be paid off and your retirement plan funded by mutual funds should eliminate most financial obligations at retirement ; therefore permanent insurance is unnecessary and too expensive anyway .
What does Dave Ramsey think of Annuities ? Not really sure as I do n't follow Dave Ramsey that much . Dave is the current financial `` guru '' gracing the airwaves . There were many before Dave and there will be many after Dave . While Dave 's message about getting out of debt and staying out of debt is a fine one , similar to the one my mom told me many years ago , Dave does n't always understand financial products that well as honest advice on them might conflict with his message .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
I love Dave Ramsey . I listen to him and have attended his financial peace university and let me tell you , great advise . I even have his book sitting on my desk as I type this . However I can not speak on behalf Dave Ramsey but if I recall correctly Dave would say do n't spend your money on a fancy car but instead build your wealth first . Dave 's saying is `` Live like no one else so later you can live like non one else '' . Also he would say carry high liability limits to protect your assets and the highest deductibles you can afford unless a higher deductible does not make a significant enough premium difference . I would recommend hisfinancialpeace series and book and then I would go ask Dave what he thinks about auto insurance .
Dave Ramsey recommends having eight to ten times your income in term life insurance . There are a number of life insurance carriers that offer the term life insurance products that Dave Ramsey recommends , and those products can be purchased on many different websites on the internet ... the price is the same for the same product .
Dave Ramsey recommends term insurance . He endorses a specific agency . He emphasizes adequate coverage which I consider essential in any type of financial planning . Not everyone will adapt their finances to Dave Ramseys model . For those who do not it would be wise to consult with a qualified agent and determine the best way to provide the protection that you need . It could be that the answer will be term insurance but for many it is other forms of life insurance . Each of us is unique and one program does not meet the needs of everyone . There is a subculture that lives near my agency that rarely purchases term life insurance .
I have read one of Dave Ramseys books but I am certainly not an expert . I think Dave Ramsey would say to have the amount of life insurance that you need in place when the need arises . A policy that has expired or is inadequate defeats the purpose of life insurance . While I realize that Dave Ramsey advocates term insurance , the key remains the same . Make sure you have enough when the need arises . If you investments reduce your risk and need for life insurance , that is fine but make sure that you have the risk covered . You are valuable and you love people who will be hurt terribly if you dont make it home today .
Dave Ramsey is a big fan of buy term life insurance and invest the rest . He cut his teeth with Priamerica here in Tennessee and the philosophy has stayed with him since he started his Financial Peace University located here in Brentwood , TN . From his radio show he usually recommends a 20 year level term which for most people is a good choice . I recommend using an independent broker to purchase the right coverage at the right price for your unique situation . Peggy is correct most of us do exactly the same as the broker Dave recommends with the same life insurance carriers .
Dave Ramsey does not think you should buy cancer insurance or any type of specific dread disease insurance . He confuses the purpose of it with major medical health insurance . Your major medical pays your doctor bills -LRB- minus your deductibles , co-pays and premiums . -RRB- Your cancer insurance pays a lump sum amount directly to you . You can use this while you are off work with cancer to pay for food , house payment , medical bills or anything else you need . Dave Ramsey is not a good resource for insurance information .
As a guest speaker at may Dave Ramsey classes , I 'm quite familiar with Dave 's perspective on term life versus whole life . Simply put , Dave is an advocate for getting the maximum amount of life insurance you can to protect the most valuable asset your family hasyour income . Term Life Insurance delivers the biggest `` bang for your buck '' when it comes to pure death benefit for the dollar you spend . There are many cash value benefits from a whole life policy . However , Dave 's guiding principles are to use the money that would go towards the whole life guarantees and cash value options of a whole life policy in a different form of investment . For many people , term life insurance is an appropriate solution .
Dave Ramsey recommends a lot of things that many financial experts agree and disagree with . Ramsey believes in term insurance , which is an appropriate choice in many situations . But not all situations . The best resource for determining ho much coverage you need and what carriers are the best choice , is an experienced broker . No fees and no hassle . just the best information .
Dave Ramsey generally suggests that someone carry 10 times their current annual income in life insurance . This means if you earn $ 50,000 per year , Dave would recommend that you purchase $ 500,000 in life insurance . Whether or not this is an adequate amount of life insurance depends on a few different factors regarding your financial situation . In actuality you may need more or less .
Dave Ramsey recommends term life insurance . Dave is a buy term and invest the difference proponent . He believes in eliminating all debt and that over the years your investment in the stock marketing will accumulate enough money to fund a retirement account debt free . So , the need for permanent life insurance is unnecessary .
Yes , Dave Ramsey does recommend Disability Insurance . In fact he considers Long Term Disability Insurance a necessity for most full time workers . He recommends buying it through your work place if that is available . If not offered there , he says to try an association , and then buy privately if unable to get through an association . But buy it .
Dave Ramsey says to only consider variable annuties if you are totally debt free and have used all your tax-deferred options . Make sure you understand the fees , riders , options and surrender period associated with your annuity . Use these four mutual funds : 1 -RRB- growth , 2 -RRB- international , 3 -RRB- growth and income , and 4 -RRB- aggressive growth . Finally , Dave Ramsey says to never use annuities inside retirement options .
Suze Orman recommends term life insurance over participating whole life insurance , which she has a disdain for . She as well as Dave Ramsey are huge proponents of term life insurance . And for financial liabilities that are time certain events , thats just fine . Generally you can only recommend what you understand . That in and of itself can eliminate your opining on an area you just dont understand .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is SR22 Car Insurance ?
The Department of Motor Vehicles may require an SR-22 form . This form verifies that a specific driver is covered with vehicle liability insurance . It is frequently used to reinstate driving privileges that have been lost . We most commonly see it in connection with a conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol . The company that issues the SR-22 is required to notify the state with an SR-26 if the policy of liability insurance is cancelled .
An SR22 is n't insurance . It is a state filing that attaches onto an auto insurance policy . an sr22 is a guarantee that you are carrying at least the state minimum auto insurance liability coverage . thus the cost of an sr22 can vary greatly , because it is highly dependent of your auto insurance rate . Things such as what vehicle you are driving , what coverages you need , your driving record , your age , and other things all go into that rating .
There are several way that you can do this . There are Many carries that will insure you even if you do not have a license . Always check your state laws . There are carriers that understand that you may need a Sr22 to get your license and to do this you must have insurance so you purchase the insurance with out a license then after you get your license in place because you got the SR22 contact your agent it should lower your rates . You DO NOT have to own a car to get insurance . You can get in some states what is called a Non owned policy and also some states have what is called a broadform and this covers any car you drive I Highly suggest that you contact a reputable independent insurance agent . They should be able to guide you through the proper laws and rules for your state .
There are several carriers that will insure you if you have no license If you are needing to get your license and to get that you need a what is called a SR22 which means you will maintain insurance . Then you can get an insurance policy at first with no license then once you get the SR22 you get your license and then change your insurance to having a license and the rates will lower . You need to explain to your agent that you are trying to get your license and that you ca n't get it with our insurance . the average cost for a SR22 is $ 25.00 ever 6 months plus the price of insurance . Each state is different but there are carriers that will insure you .
An SR22 is nothing more than an administrative trail of the status of your auto insurance coverage . The form is filed because the State licensing agency has determined a need to be aware of the status of your coverage , usually due to failing to have insurance or having committed any of several offenses of driving laws . An SR22 is merely attached to your insurance record and your carrier agrees to submit status updates to your state bureau of motor vehicles . An SR22 does not provide any coverage .
This would be a non owners Insurance and is basically an auto insurance policy without a car , so yes you can . A policy like this is very similar to a conventional auto insurance policy . SR22 can be for different reasons but the most common is for DUI and for a person who do n't own a vehicle . This will reinstate your license with the DMV as long as you keep paying your premiums until the DMV states you do n't need an sr22 any more .
In Virginia , you can get an insurance policy and file an SR22 which would allow you to get your license back . You have to check with DMV to see what fines need to be paid but you can get insurance . DMV will inform you how long the SR22 is required but in most cases it 's between 1 - 3 years .
Keep in mind that an SR22 really is n't insurance at all . It is a state filing that attaches onto auto insurance . For people who do not own vehicles , the SR22 can be attached to either a named operators policy -LRB- aka non-owners policy -RRB- or a broad form named driver auto insurance policy .
States have different rules but in Virginia you have to turn in your tags before cancelling your insurance . If you have tags on a car , regardless if the car is drivable or not , you have to maintain insurance . Failure to do so will result in a suspension of your driver 's license , fines and an SR22 .
An SR22 is simply an administrative requirement by your licensing agency that your insurance carrier keep them away of the status of your coverage . This is probably due to failing to have insurance , exceeding points in their rating system , or because you got caught operating a vehicle under certain other circumstances . Unless your insurance carrier prohibits the extension of liability borrowed , rented , or use of other non-owned cars , you should have coverage but the best answer will be the one your insurance company or agent gives you .
An SR22 is a Financial Responsibility filing with the State informing them that you have either purchased either liability insurance or a financial responsibility bond . It will depend on the company renting the vehicle but most companies will rent you a vehicle . They may want you to , and it would be advisable in this case , to purchase the extra insurance they offer or talk with your agent before renting a car and ask his advice since he would be more aware of the situation .
Yes . For drivers who do not own vehicles , they can purchase what is known as a named operators policy . These policies are most common when a non-owner needs an sr22 filing to reinstate their license . Some states also have an alternative option of purchasing a broadform named drivers policy . Either policy will work for non-owners . But neither policy offers comprehensive or collision coverage on the vehicle the insured is driving . Only liability , medical , and uninsured motorist bodily injury coverages are offered on this policy .
Yes you can , most likely with an SR22 filing . Although it is illegal , people do drive with suspended licenses . Expect to pay a higher rate with a high risk auto insurance carrier . Many people with suspended licenses must be able to show proof of insurance before their licenses will be reinstated .
There are carriers in Montana that can cover you with a suspended license . Some carriers in other states may have different guidelines but many will write it . If you are required to get an SR22 so you can get your license back after you have your license back the carrier will adjust your rates with a valid license .
there are 2 options , depending on the state you live in : a named operator policy or a broadform named driver policy -LRB- A third option would be a financial responsibility bond , but those are very rare . Ohio may be the only state that has it -RRB- . most states have the named operator policy , quite a few states have the broadform policy . both policies offer liability , medical payments , and uninsured motorist coverage . But neither policy offers comprehensive or collision coverage . Also , both policies will work for you if you need an SR22 or FR44 filing .
You can also read more detail at this link : Information on SR22 Insurance Quotes and cheapest auto insurance WEBSITELINK
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Considered An Asset ?
When calculating your net worth , you look at the net cash value of each permanent policy and denote it as an asset . The net cash value is the amount that you would receive if you were to cash in the policy today . You can find that by ordering a current illustration from the insurance company .
Life insurance is personal property , i.e. an asset , a tax advantaged asset , an asset that may be creditor proof . Permanent life insurance generally two financial components : cash values and a death benefit . These components can be collateralized , endorsed , sold in life settlements , borrowed against and used as a source of supplemental income .
The current cash surrender value of the policy is the asset value of a life insurance contract . As property , life insurance has value and is liquid . If the policy owner decides to `` cash in '' the policy , the insurance company will pay the cash surrender value to the owner within a week or two .
There are two factors determining whether life insurance affects your ability to qualify for Medicaid : your states status on expansion , and whether your life insurance has cash value . The Affordable Care Act encourages states to expand Medicaid eligibility . The states expanding may no longer have asset based eligibility criteria . If you live in one of these states your life insurance does not matter . The states choosing not to expand may have asset and income criteria . The asset criteria is $ 2,000 and a cash value life insurance policy may impact eligibility . Term life insurance does not have cash value and would not be considered an asset . Permanent policies such as universal life and whole life do have cash value and would be considered an asset .
If you are applying for Medicaid , life insurance is not considered an asset unless it has cash value , and then only the cash value is considered as the asset . In a financial portfolio , likewise , the cash value of a permanent policy is the asset . On the other hand , the life insurance death benefit left to heirs may be considered part of the estate .
Whole life insurance is a permanent cash value policy . It is considered an asset in simple accounting terms , as it can be sold and exchanged for another asset . When qualifying for government benefits it is sometimes counted as an asset . In order to qualify for Medicaid in states that did not expand , you may not have more than $ 2,000 in assets . The same criteria apply for Medicaid long term care benefits in all states . Whole life insurance cash values do count towards that total . The free student financial aid form does not count cash value life insurance as an asset . This is a big advantage for using life insurance to fund college savings .
Often times life insurance is considered an assets . Term insurance is not generally referred to as an asset as it covers a temporary need for death benefit protection . Permanent life insurance like whole life insurance or universal life insurance is generally considered an asset as it has a cash value that you have access to any time you want .
No , a term life insurance policy is not an asset . The only type of policies that are considered assets are whole life and universal life because these polices accumulate cash value . The only point where a term life insurance policy would be an asset is after a death claim and the proceeds would become an asset to the beneficiary .
The face amount of a life insurance policy does not count as an asset ; the cash value of the life insurance policy may count as an asset . Therefore , Term life insurance is not counted as an asset because there is no cash value . If there is cash value built up in Whole or Universal Life , that cash value may be counted as an asset , depending on the situation . If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance payout , the amount you receive usually is not counted as an asset . There are conditions where it might be , but not generally .
There are assets protected from creditors by federal and/or state statute . Those assets are considered essential for the debtor to maintain at least a financial well-being . Creditor protection is balanced by the concerns for creditor 's rights to access the debtor 's assets . Annuities can be argued as a legitimate retirement plan like IRAs . Some states exempt annuities from the claims of creditors . Each state has differing views and regulations on the claims of creditors . Seek out legal counsel to determine what assets are protected from claims of creditors .
Auto coverage depends on your personal financial situation . It is generally prudent to consider liability coverage that is at least $ 500,000 with a total $ 500,000 limit -LRB- a $ 1,000,000 limit would be more ideal -RRB- . Keep in mind that if you have assets in access of this amount , you risk those assets if you do not have coverage protecting the amount of those assets . Most auto insurers will cap coverage at $ 1,000,000 meaning you may need to look at an umbrella policy to further cover assets .
In Canada , you can own a policy on anyone you have an insurable interest in -LRB- with their permission -RRB- including yourself . If your company owns the life insurance on your life and the company is not the beneficiary . It would be considered a taxable benefit . With one exception transfer of ownership is considered a deemed disposition . In other words it could trigger a taxable gain . The Income Tax Act provides for the transfer of a policy to the policyowners child , without a taxable disposition to the policyowner , if a child of the policyowner is the only person insured . Child includes any natural or adopted child , grandchild , stepchild , son - or daughter-in-law . THAT ONE EXCEPTION creates a planning opportunity . Does it make sense to keep paying income tax each year on the growth of your non-registered investments ? Use non-registered assets you wont need during your lifetime . Buy an exempt permanent life insurance policy . Structure the policy to : enable tax-efficient distribution of your assets to future generations and give you control and access while living . Growth inside a permanent life insurance policy is not subject to annual tax -LRB- within limits -RRB- and Proceeds of life insurance go to named beneficiaries tax-free . Example : How it works : You own the policy . Your adult child is the insured person , Your grandchild is the beneficiary While living , Your adult child is contingent owner At your death , Your adult child becomes owner of policy Benefits for you Taxes - Reduce your annual income tax Control - Keep control of your assets - Can change beneficiary and coverage amount -LRB- subject to underwriting requirements -RRB- - Can access the cash value in the policy if necessary Legacy - Preserve your legacy for your children and grandchildren - Generate estate value , not taxable income If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Typically , Medicaid can not take your life insurance policy . If you have a large cash value policy , such as whole life insurance or universal life insurance , the cash value is considered an asset and could keep you from qualifying for Medicaid , but they can not take your policy away . The policy you own is a contract between you and the life insurance company you purchased it from and no one can take that away from you . If you own a term life policy with no cash value , then Medicaid will not consider it an asset and it is irrelevant to your qualifying .
When you go through a spend down process to apply for Medicaid , they will look at your assets . Term Life Insurance does not have a cash value , so is not considered an asset . Cash value life insurance is allowed to have a certain face amount , and if it is under that , you can keep it . If it is higher than the allowable limit , you may have more choices than just cashing it in and using it for your skilled care expenses -LRB- note : Medicaid does not just take your policy away -RRB- . You can possibly assign the policy to a funeral home for your final expenses . Or you may be able to keep part of the death benefit and use the rest to help pay for nursing home costs under the Long Term Care Benefit Plan . Your social worker should help you find the option that works best for your welfare . If you foresee going on Medicaid in the distant future , you may want to consider transferring ownership of your cash value life insurance to someone else . This must be done years ahead of time , or it will still be called an nonexempt asset .
There are two different Social Security disability programs , and several different types of life insurance . Social Security Disability Insurance pays benefits to people who worked and paid into the system . Having life insurance does not impact your ability to qualify for this program . Supplemental Security Income is a needs based program . There are complex income and asset limitations . In general anyone with assets exceeding $ 2,000 is not qualified to receive benefits under SSI . Cash value life insurance policies owned by the individual may be considered assets , and could disqualify the person until sold . Term life policies have no cash value and would not impact eligibility .
No , term life insurance is not considered an asset . Due to the limited nature of the death benefit , along with no cash value accumulation it would not qualify for this consideration . If you have a whole life or universal life policy with cash value accumulating inside of the contract , then that WILL be considered an asset . Permanent life insurance is typically the second item listed on a person 's personal balance sheet .
There are several factors to consider when qualifying for a certain amount of life insurance . One do you have a beneficiary with an insurable interest ? Meaning , if you die does a family member , loved one or business suffer financially at your loss ? If so , then the insurance company underwriters will need to consider your age , build , health status and history , life style , income , assets , occupation and residence to determine the face amount of how much life insurance you may qualify for . The rule of thumb , based on age and life insurance carrier , can be 10 to 35 times your income plus your assets . I highly recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker to help you navigate this maze of coverages as well as finding you the best rates .
How much investment advisors charge will depend on not only the type of service they are providing , but the amount of assets involved as well as the how the advisors charge -LRB- hourly , flat fee , percentage of assets -RRB- . Hourly Rate : Advisors may charge an hourly rate for building a financial plan or reviewing an existing one . The hourly rate will depend on the skill level of work involved . A typical range of this rate would be $ 200 - $ 500 per hour Flat Fee : Advisor may charge a simple set price to complete a task , such as building a financial plan . The rate might be $ 500 or $ 5,000 depending on the complexity of the plan . Percentage of Assets : To manage funds in a client 's portfolio , an investment advisor may charge a set percentage of the amount of assets being managed . A typical range is 0.5 % to 2.0 % of assets . Typically , the higher the amount of assets being managed , the lower the overall fee percentage rate . Each Investment Advisor must disclose their method -LRB- s -RRB- of charging and the fee schedule when engaging in a relationship with the client . But , it does n't hurt to ask the advisor upfront .
A whole life insurance policy is an extremely flexible product that can meet many needs in retirement . The most obvious need is death . It is obvious that retirement always ends in death . Death is not inexpensive . The proceeds of a whole life insurance policy can pay off some or all of those expenses . After a certain age term policies can not be written at any price . I recently had a client who forgot that there was a life policy on her husband . She was paying his funeral expenses on an installment plan . I discovered the policy and brought it to her attention . She was delighted . Another use of a whole life policy is to transfer property to heirs . Often a person will want to leave money to children , grandchildren or a favorite charity . They will then try to conserve their retirement assets so that money will be available when the die . Unfortunately they often rob themselves of lifes simple pleasures in their drive to provide that inheritance . A life insurance policy can do that at the beginning of retirement leaving the person the balance of assets to spend as they wish . Some people have estates that are subject to estate tax . The problem with estate tax is that if there isnt cash to pay the taxes , assets are often sold at below market value to pay the tax . Having cash can make the difference of keeping the family business going , maintaining the family farm or closing them up for taxes . Since that can happen at any time , a whole life policy is particularly flexible in that regard . Whole life insurance is often used when a person wants to leave a specific valuable asset to one child but wants to treat all the children in the same manner . The heirs that are not going to get that valuable asset could receive equivalent proceeds from a whole life policy and everyone would be happy . A whole life policy is often used to purchase the interest of another party in a business . In this case the surviving partners dont particularly want to share everything with a widow who may not be acquainted with the business . A whole life policy can provide the cash to take care of that situation by giving the survivors the funds they need to purchase the widows interests . Sometimes whole life insurance is used to fund day to day living expenses in retirement . I just finished a comparison that showed that a whole life policy performed as well as a fixed annuity in accumulating money for retirement and that it did that with the promise to pay the full benefit should the person die before retiring . The whole life policy has non-forfeiture provisions which can pay a lifetime stream of income if desired or the policy would also give the person the flexibility to use the policy in other ways depending upon future , unforeseen events . This may sound strange but I often get requests for whole life insurance from older individuals . They seem to appreciate the value of lasting protection at a fixed price .
A life insurance wrapper for all intent and purposes is a structured investment tool which combines investments in funds and life insurance . The insurance wrapper allows the policy holder a choice of which funds they wish to invest in . In lieu of paying premiums the policyholder would pay the assets or funds that he chooses . Since the assets or funds are already paid to the insurance company they would not be attachable by creditors since they would not be considered the policy holders assets and therefor the policy holder would be 100 % protected .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is A Variable Life Insurance A Good Investment ?
You are liable to get a different answer from everyone you ask . Is Variable Life Insurance a Good Investment really depends on what you want . First , this is a Life Insurance policy . When you die , providing the policy is in force at the time of death , a death benefit will be paid to your beneficiaries . Second , there is an investment component to these meaning from your premium , after the cost of insurance and any other fees/expenses are paid , the remaining funds are placed into accounts similar to what you might see with mutual funds or stocks . The risk is you are subject to the market loss just as you get the gains . Your policy COULD run out of monies if your `` investment '' continues to loose money which may cause the policy to lapse unless you put more money into it , on top of your regular premium .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
Variable life works very much like Universal life in concept , except that the accumulation account allows for different investment choices than just a fixed account . A variable life policy will offer different investment choices within the policy . Usually mutual funds are the type of investments used within the accumulation account . The insured selects from the choices offered by the policy . Usually there is something for just about every risk profile . The insured selects for example 3 funds to have the excess premium -LRB- beyond the current monthly charge for insurance and fees -RRB- deposited into . Over time these will gain and they will lose as any investment does . The idea is the same as any investment , to make money over time . A variable life is very much a hands on product . It should be reviewed and possibly rebalanced on a regular basis . Variable life policies are not ' `` fire and forget '' plans .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
Life insurance is not an investment at all . It 's protection . To be considered an investment , the product MUST have risk to your principle amount paid . That means even if you carry out the terms of the contract , you can still lose some or all of your principle and get nothing in return for it . The reason you would do this is to have the opportunity that the investment will go well and return MORE than you paid in . Life insurance does not work that way . It can never legally be called an investment . One form of life insurance -LRB- Variable Life -RRB- has the cash accounts invested but the life insurance component of the product is still not an investment . No investment will do what life insurance does for you . You should never confuse your life insurance needs with your investment needs .
Universal Variable Life Insurance -LRB- or VUL - Variable Universal Life insurance -RRB- is a form of life insurance that has a death benefit and investment component . Agents who sell Variable Universal Life must have a securities license in addition to a life insurance license . The variable part of the title refers to the investment aspect ; the universal part of the title refers to the insurance aspect of this product .
One type of life insurance -LRB- variable life insurance -RRB- has an investment component but no life insurance itself is NEVER an investment . Life insurance is guaranteed protection . An investment is risk . Without risk the product can NOT be considered an investment . This is not a bad thing . It 's a good thing . Life insurance does what it was designed to do better than any investment ever could . You will find a few agents that will call life insurance an investment to make a sale . Those who get caught at it are subject to huge fines and can lose their license to sell insurance . It is considered very misleading and the Department of Insurance of your state should be contacted if you ever have an agent telling you such a thing .
I am going to answer this question as someone who sells whole life and universal life only . I do not sell variable life insurance , which is typically considered an investment . First of all , I think the word `` investment '' does not really apply to life insurance , regardless of the type of product . This is because life insurance is first and foremost intended to provide a benefit to survivors . Any cash it develops is nice to have , but it is secondary . The first priority in buying life insurance should be getting the most attractive premium for the entire time you need coverage . Even with very aggressive underwriting , that cost can be higher than the costs associated with conventional investment products . Now , life insurance does have specific tax advantages . These include tax-deferred cash accumulation , and income-tax free benefits . You should speak with your tax advisor for more details . If the insured is young enough , and qualifies for a low enough rate , and is in a high-enough tax bracket , then the cost of his life insurance might be lower than the taxes he would pay on an investment outside life insurance . Here life insurance may be considered a smart `` investment . '' In most other cases , life insurance would not be a smart investment . But , with a strong product from a strong company , the guaranteed cash value in a whole life or universal life product could be significant . You could get more bang for your buck inside life insurance that you would from a standard conservative investment . For that reason , people do use life insurance as the guaranteed or conservative part of their financial portfolio .
A tax deferred variable annuity , like all insurance or investment products , needs to be suitable to the buyers financial profile , which includes risk tolerance assessment , financial goals and a life expectancy report . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security investment and an insurance product . It has a general interest rate account and separate sub accounts using equities and bond instruments . Tax deferred variable annuity separate subaccounts can lose money . Three items to consider that may make sense for a tax deferred variable annuity purchase : If youre in a high tax bracket , the tax deferral feature could , over time , be of significant value in your investment posture is market driven .
Variable annuities are not bad , Whether they are right for you depends on your individual situation . In Canada variable deferred annuities -LRB- during investment accumulation phase -RRB- are often referred to as segregated funds or seg funds . Seg funds are similar to mutual funds so your investment is at risk , but since they are issued by an insurance company they have minimum maturity and death guarantees typically 75 % or 100 % . Some companies also offer resetting or locking in of investment gains . In order to determine if , or which , investment funds are right for you , a risk tolerance questionnaire should be completed . In addition , before you purchase you are to receive an information folder in the interest of complete disclosure . You will find more information on segregated funds at my web site www.jpw.ca Immediate variable payout annuities have a portion or all of the income dependent on the performance of a fund or index . An independent insurance agent / broker will be able to assist you with options from a number of companies . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
There 's a big difference between the two . A mutual fund is an investment vehicle operated by an investment company which pools the assets of many individuals . The money raised is then invested in accordance with pre-defined goals . Money market funds : These funds invest in a variety of short term , money market debt such as Treasure bills or commercial paper . Growth funds : have an emphasis on long-term capital growth , usually through investment in common stock . Income funds : Focus on providing high , current income , using bonds and other income producing securities . Balanced funds : strive to provide income and long-term capital gain . Both stocks and bonds are used . Keep in mind that mutual funds have risk and you can lose money.Non-qualified tax deferred annuities have basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
A mutual fund is an investment vehicle operated by an investment company which pools the assets of many individuals . The money raised is then invested in accordance with pre-defined goals . Money market funds : These funds invest in a variety of short term , money market debt such as Treasure bills or commercial paper . Growth funds : have an emphasis on long-term capital growth , usually through investment in common stock . Income funds : Focus on providing high , current income , using bonds and other income producing securities . Balanced funds : strive to provide income and long-term capital gain . Both stocks and bonds are used . Keep in mind that mutual funds have risk and you can lose money . Non-qualified tax deferred annuities have basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
Appreciable life insurance is also called Variable Appreciable Life Insurance . It is a type of life insurance that has an investment variable in addition to insurance protection . If the Variable Appreciable Life Insurance policy is Whole Life , the investment is is put into mutual fund funds which may cause the cash value to increase , decrease , or stay the same .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
What is a variable universal life policy ? A VUL is a type of universal life policy that has it 's investment pool in the stock market . Universal life normally consists of an insurance account and an investment account that make up the guts of the policy . Any funds collected above the cost of insurance are deposited in the investment account . Later on , those funds are used to help reduce the actual cost of insurance as Universal life is basically term insurance with an investment account . Variable UL is simply the same thing except the investment account is now based in market securities -LRB- usually mutual funds -RRB- which present the opportunity of higher returns . Be aware with the higher returns there also comes greater risk . A VUL should never be purchased and forgotten about . Chances are it wo n't be there if that 's what the purchaser does . A VUL requires oversight and adjustments over time to get the best use out of it .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance If I Smoke Pot ?
Yes , you can get life insurance if you smoke pot . If you get a medically underwritten policy , the insurance company will probably ask you to fill out a Drug Questionnaire . If you are an infrequent pot smoker , you will be give tobacco rates , but they can fall in the Standard to Preferred range . If you smoke pot daily , or have had treatment for drug or alcohol use in the past . you would probably be declined for a policy , but may be able to find a No Exam policy .
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
Yes , you can get life insurance if you smoke pot . If you get a medically underwritten policy , the insurance company will probably ask you to fill out a Drug Questionnaire . If you are an infrequent pot smoker , you will be give tobacco rates , but they can fall in the Standard to Preferred range . If you smoke pot daily , or have had treatment for drug or alcohol use in the past . you would probably be declined for a policy , but may be able to find a No Exam policy .
I can give you some examples from cases I have handled . I think you will be surprised . Many people assume they will not qualify for life insurance , and happily , they are wrong . It takes a lot . One fellow needed to purchase several million dollars of life insurance to cover a bank loan for his business . His business was a bar/restaurant . The night before his insurance exam , a few of his buddies came by to socialize a bit . They did cocaine . Of course , he tested positive . No insurance for him . He probably would have qualified for a guaranteed-issue burial policy . But the $ 25,000 would not have done him any good . He needed that bank loan . And he needed life insurance to get it . And you know what ? He didnt get the life insurance , and he didnt get the bank loan . He would have had to wait a few years before he became eligible again . Five years is the industry standard , but I probably couldve gotten it for him sooner . Another candidate also a business owner went to rehab for both drug and alcohol addiction . Unfortunately , he didnt schedule the necessary follow-ups after his treatment . Carriers were worried that a relapse would be right around the corner without the proper support system in place . He will also have to wait a year or two . Then you have people who have a number of serious illnesses that just arent sufficiently controlled . The combination of obesity , heart condition , diabetes , smoking etc. is wicked . Ive had people come to me with these factors in place , and then some . Has to be some measure of control . Otherwise , you look like a walking timebomb . These cases are extreme . Other cases seem scary but can be quite placeable . Pot smoking ? You can get a policy . Bankruptcy ? You can get a policy . On probation for a felony ? You can get a policy . Suspended drivers license ? You can get a policy . Travel to India , or South America , or rural China ? You can get a policy . Mountain climber ? You can get a policy . Deep water scuba diver ? You can get a policy . Of course , a number of important factors need to be in place , but on the overall , it can be done . Surprise !
Usually , most policies require a quick medical exam , which includes a urine sample . And they will test for pot . The good news is that most companies will not decline you coverage . They will just consider you a `` Smoker '' and give you smoker rates . But , currently , I know of 3 companies that offer `` Non-Smoker '' rates to pot smokers . Aviva is the most relaxed about it . And will allow up to a `` Preferred '' non-smoker rating for using 2 times per week or less . Lincoln National is next and will give Standard Non-Smoker ratings to people who smoke 2 times per week or less . MetLife allows for 1 time per week and will offer a Standard nonsmoker rating . Prudential allows for 2 times per month , and offers a Standard nonsmoker rating . Long story short if you smoke Pot , Aviva or Lincoln National will be your best bets . And this list is as of 3/2013 , it could easily change .
You can be denined for smoking pot , just depends on the company underwriting guidelines that you are applying with . Compared to other drugs most carriers do n't consider pot to be quite as an immediate decline . Most that I know that will underwrite pot smokers , treat the pot smoker as a tobbaco smoker which usually bumps the premium up considerably .
Yes , usually testing during the life insurance underwriting process will include testing for `` pot '' . While it may not mean a decline of the offer of insurance , it will change the price offered in many cases . Many `` pot '' smokers do not smoke cigarettes , some insurance carriers consider `` pot '' smokers to still be smokers and adjust the premium upward . As we move into a time where many states are legalizing `` pot '' expect some changes in how `` pot '' is considered , but it may take a long time before this happens .
Life insurance companies do test for THC , the chemical in the blood that is deposited after smoking or ingesting pot . If they find THC in the blood , they will ask you to fill out a drug questionnaire , and from there decide how to rate you . With some companies , infrequent marijuana use does not affect your rates much at all . If you are taking a policy that does not require an exam -LRB- called nonmed or no exam policies -RRB- they will not test for pot . They do usually ask about drug use on the application .
There are more and more choices of life insurance for persons who smoke marijuana in a responsible fashion . Most companies will charge smoker rates , but some will rate as good as preferred smoker . Of course , even those companies can deny coverage if there have been recent driving violations due to marijuana use , or if you have had drug treatment and continue to smoke pot . Contact an impaired risk agency to find the most affordable life insurance rates with marijuana usage .
That is an excellent question ! It will be interesting to see how the life insurance companies treat the drug use now that it is becoming legalized . I 'd guess that they wo n't move much on the issue , since impairment increases risk , whether it is pot or prescription pain killers . But yes they test , on larger policies , and on the smaller policies there is a question or two usually about drug use . If your demise comes as a result of smoking , and you 'd checked the boxes no , I 'd expect your claim to be denied , especially if it is illegal where you live . Most companies will deny the payout if your untimely demise is a result of the commission of a crime . Thanks for asking !
Why buy Cash Value Life ? Why not ? Cash value life insurance provides a tax favored pot of money that the insured can use at their choice . This pot of money inside your policy can be called upon in times of need to provide funds for emergencies , education expenses and really , anything you want . The best part of that is you do n't have to ask permission , you do n't have to explain your need to that guy in the cubicle that looks down his nose at you to decide if you 're worthy . You just call and it 's wired to your account , no questions asked and you use it for what you want . For some people who understand , that aspect alone is very liberating . And it 's been that way a long while . JC Penny , the actual JC Penny , used the cash values in his life insurance to help pay his payroll and keep his stores open during the great depression . There are other valuable aspects about cash value life I could detail but I 'll stick to this one for now . I 'll bring up another positive on another post .
Yes , you can usually get life insurance if you smoke weed . If you smoke it daily , or have had drug treatment and still use weed , or have had recent numerous traffic violations or DUI and smoke pot , then your marijuana use could cause you to be declined . But moderate cannabis use without other complicating issues will not affect your life insurance rating much , except for changing it to smoker rates with most companies .
A drug test can be your best friend when you apply for life insurance . If you smoke pot on a casual basis , and have been prequalified for non-smoker rates , then a clean drug test on your insurance exam will prove you are true to your word . Let 's suppose you used cocaine in the last year under highly exceptional circumstances , and your broker was able to get you underwriting leniency from a carrier . Their offer would be contingent upon a clean drug test now . If you you still use drugs , then you should consider one of the simplified issue policies referenced above . The only problem is that the total amount of coverage for which you will qualify will be comparatively small . If you need more substantial coverage , then there is a small possibility an excess-market carrier will take you . These underwriting syndicates specialize in extreme risks .
You can be denied life insurance for smoking pot , but it is certainly not a given . If you apply for a nonmed policy that requires `` no '' answers to all the questions on the application , saying `` yes '' to the drug question could cause a decline . Some companies simply lump marijuana with all other illegal drugs , and will decline for any marijuana use . Most companies will decline if marijuana is used by an addict , or someone who has had treatment for substance abuse in the past few years . However , there are many companies that will approve at standard to preferred rates , as long as the marijuana use does not affect their lives in a destructive fashion .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
What are the advantages and disadvantages of life insurance ? The advantages of owning life insurance are many as others have already noted . So I will focus on the one advantage life insurance has over any other product or investment option . Life insurance is the only product that instantly creates a pot of money upon the death of the insured . No other product can do this . Every other choice , the money has to be in your account in advance . The biggest disadvantage to owning life insurance is that it is a boring product that simply does it 's job . You will not impress your friends or others at parties when you talk about the performance of your life insurance plan.Cheers .
I am not real clear on your question . Do you have disability insurance either on your own or through an employer you wish to supplement ? If this is the case there are some things to keep in mind . First disability insurance policies coordinate with each other . The benefits to you can not exceed the limits of the policies combined . For instance , one policy will pay up to 67 % and the other policy will pay up to 70 % of your current income . If your limit is $ 5,000 per month the very best thing to happen would be the terms may last longer by having a bigger `` pot of money '' in your benefit bank . If you are looking for a supplement to cover a long elimination period and you can afford it , then it may be a good idea . If your long term policy has a 180 day elimination period , you may need a short term policy with benefits as early as 7 days but only up to 180 days when the long term policy is met . Sit down with your trusted advisor to work out your details to avoid paying premiums with no benefits because of those limits . I am always available to help as well . Good luck !
The average cost in the US has been around $ 850 for the past several year . My data could be a bit off and old , but in the last several years competition for auto business has kept pricing static . Here is the basic issue question : I do n't know who you are in a demographic sense , but also in the sense of needing coverage to protect yourself . . Auto Insurance is regulated by the various 50 states and can a bit different in what coverages are required to be offered.But here is what typically comprises and auto policy : Bodily Injury Liability -LRB- protection for the people you kill or injure -RRB- Property Damage -LRB- for the car you hit or the 18 wheeler you force off the road unintentionally -RRB- Medical Payments for the little issue that happens in your car that you do n't want to have to file suit against some one to be indemnified -LRB- i.e. your passenger catching their finger in the closing of a door -RRB- Collision for damage to your own car in a wreck or hitting a curb or a pot hole etc. . ComprehensiveCoverage : for theft , flood , hail , falling trees , broken windshields etc And last , but probably the most important coverage on your policy , Uninsured and Under-insured Motorist Coverage So , despite all the ads to the contrary you ought to take more than 15 minutes to figure , with the help of an agent , what exposures you have . The worst scenarios have nothing to do with fixing your cars , it is about fixing peoples lives and keeping you assets . So to answer your question I would need to know what do you have to lose , if you cause injury to someone else , because what you do not pay for in insurance you will pay for on your own including future garnishment of your income . A fairly decent rule of thumb to consider things by would be to look at your lifestyle . If you already own your own home -LRB- including with a mortgage -RRB- you need a minimum of 100/300/100 spit limits of Bodily Injury Coverage -LRB- that protects the people you hit -RRB- and you should carry the same to protect yourself , your family and passengers in your car with the same limit of 100/300/100 for Uninsured and under insured motorist coverage . If you do not understand how all of these pieces of the coverage fit together then you should really seek out an Independent agent who sells for multiple companies and can tailor the policy to your needs If you live in AZ , CA , TX , GA , or MO I would be glad to assist you -LRB- call 1-866-933-4372 -RRB- -LRB- open 8 AM to 8 PM Est Monday through Friday -RRB- . If you live elsewhere seek out an Independent Agent in your area Good luck to you and I hope this answer helps some Jack Heller , CPCU
Is disability insurance worth having ? The answer depends on the individual . What we 're talking about with disability insurance is paycheck protection . Disability insurance does n't pay for a medical claim , at least not directly . Disability insurance simply creates a pot of money to use as you would with your paycheck . It is up to the individual to decide the worth of protecting their paycheck . Maybe if there 's passive income or massive savings the need for disability insurance may not be that great . But , if you 're not in that position financially , you should think long and hard about disability insurance .
Employers want to attract workers , and sometimes pay alone is n't enough . To sweeten the pot , they add benefits , like insurance , vacation pay , or sick days . The insurance that is offered is owned by the company itself , and not the employees who purchase it . The company will also usually pay for some of the cost of that insurance . It is only offered to you as long as you are employed there , and once you leave , unless you opt to pay COBRA prices for it , it ends when your employment does . If you have more questions , please hit the link to contact me , I 'd be happy to answer them for you . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How To Write An Appeal Letter For Disability Insurance ?
how to write an appeal letter for Disability Insurance ? If you 've been declined for issue of a Disability policy you can appeal to the underwriter to reconsider the decline if you have additional information to offer or there is some change to what is in question . Underwriters , especially disability coverage underwriters work under strict guidelines . In order to appeal you must be able to introduce new information . Usually with a decline , the letter will provide the reason for .
how to write an appeal letter for Disability Insurance ? If you 've been declined for issue of a Disability policy you can appeal to the underwriter to reconsider the decline if you have additional information to offer or there is some change to what is in question . Underwriters , especially disability coverage underwriters work under strict guidelines . In order to appeal you must be able to introduce new information . Usually with a decline , the letter will provide the reason for .
If you write an appeal letter to your health insurance company , call the carrier or broker first to obtain a contact name and address . Be sure to include all pertinent facts about your claim denial and additional information that may cause an underwriter to consider changing their decision . It never cost anything to request a reversal .
If you have had a claim denied and you disagree with the determination in the letter that was sent to you the letter will also have an explanation of how you should respond . Generally the letter would state you have 30 days to put in writing why you feel your claim should not be denied . State all the facts clearly then mail the letter in to the address on the letter sent to you and your rebuttal will be reviewed . If you are still denied but feel you are right and the insurance provider is incorrect in their assessment you can write to your states department of insurance and they can look into the matter . I also highly recommend you discuss the matter with your agent .
The most common approachto file an appeal to a Medicare claimis to complete a `` redetermination request form , '' and send it to theMedicare contractor at the address listed on your Medicare Summary Notice . You should circle the items your would like appealed , explain in writing -LRB- with as much detail as possible -RRB- why you disagree with the original determination , and include as much information as possible to back up your case . An appeal will always have a much higher likelihood of succeeding if your doctor or other health care provider also supplies a written statement backing your position .
Why were you turned down for life insurance ? There could be numberous reasons or just one . If you were declined you should have been notified of the decline and advised to your rights to appeal the decision . Life insurance underwriting looks at your medical history , your current health , your driving record , your credit history and other things health and financial . You should have received a letter .
To be honest , I am not sure if you are asking about being denied a policy , or having a claim denied . If you are denied a policy by one company , just have your Insurance Professional find another company whose underwriting standards would enable them to offer coverage . If you are denied coverage on a claim , again , check with your Insurance Professional about that company 's coverage terms and conditions and what their appeal process might be . If still unsatisfied , you could always send a letter to your state 's InsuranceDepartment and ask them to inquire .
To appeal a Long Term Care Insurance denial or Life Insurance denial , you must first find out the reason for the denial . It may simply be that the company was unable to secure a certain set of medical records , and thus could not make a decision based on lack of information . You might be able to track down those medical records and be able to be approved . Or , your medical records or MIB may state your health in a mistaken way . You may be able to do additional testing to disprove that , or get an informative letter from your doctor stating the correct information . This can be submitted directly to the underwriter and/or to the MIB to get your information there corrected .
Our colleagues at HDA give you a great answer about 21st Century . However a couple weeks ago I wrote coverage for a customer -LRB- from 21st Century -RRB- with one of our agency 's top performing companies . . We were able to write the coverage for both auto and home with an ability to create over $ 700 in discounts on the homeowners for having the companion auto policy insured by the same carrier . Even on a jumbo home for our area $ 700 dollars is a lot of premium . Consider if you will that being a homeowner makes you a better credit risk and insurance risk , but offering only the auto or only the home is not as appealing to many carriers as the whole account . Some carriers in fact offer common deductibles for the same event -LRB- such that a hail storm would require one deductible not one on each car and one on house -RRB- So , seriously consider the coverage upsides and downsides along with price in your comparison shopping .
Writing a cover letter to insurance carriers informing them of the death of an insured should discuss the cause of death and the circumstances that surround it . Short and to the point communication is best . In the vast majority of cases , a family member , who may also be a beneficiary , compose cover letters to the insurance company . If the death occurred during the first two years , the insurance company will investigate the death with greater due diligence to confirm if suicide was that cause of death . If suicide was the cause of death the claim would be denied .
The simplest way to cancel any insurance is to simply stop paying the premiums . The policy will lapse and be cancelled . If you 've paid premiums in advance you may be able to get a partial refund if you write a letter formally cancelling the policy and requesting a refund of the unused portion of premiums paid . You will want to keep a copy of the dated letter and have the one you mail certified with a delivery receipt .
Any time you request a cancellation for insurance it 's best to put it in writing . You can write a letter and fax or e-mail it directly to Progressive . I would also recommend following up a day later to make sure they received the document . If you 've moved make sure you include your new address if you are owed a refund .
How to write a letter for a life insurance claim ? There really is n't a need to . Contact the carrier or go online and you will find or request a death claim form . In it , there should be instructions on how to fill out and what additonal paperwork may be necessary . Usually a certified copy of the death certificate is needed for submittal . Your agent should be able to help you complete the steps you need to .
Disputing a health insurance claim , or what usually is the rejection of a health insurance claim is an appeals process . All carriers give the insured the opportunity to appeal a decision . This process is usually lengthy and in my experience often unsuccessful . Do n't let that stop you from getting what you deserve however . As an experienced agent , if my client feels the carrier should have paid , then I encourage and assist in the process .
The definition of disability is precisely presented in the disability policy and sales material . It varies between companies and contracts . The most liberal definition is any disability that prevents you from engaging in your current occupation . There are much more restrictive definitions even down to , disability is the inability to perform any work . As a general rule the most liberal definitions appeal to highly specialized professionals . Often these individuals could do any number of other occupations but if their job is to do heart catheterizations they want to be reimbursed any time they are unable to do that amazing subspecialty .
Can you cancel your term life insurance ? Yes , you can cancel a term policy a couple of ways . First , simply let the insurance company know in writing that you wish to cancel . They will cancel on the date asked for or the date of receipt of the letter if no cancelation date is given . They will refund any premium unused . The second way is to let the premium lapse . Why would you do it this way ? Because it gives you a grace period to really be sure it 's what you want to do . I remember my first day in this business , there was a couple of people in the office crying in loud voices , `` but he did n't mean it '' . They were there trying to reinstate a policy that the owner had just cancelled and died like a week later . There was the letter from the insured , demanding his policy be cancelled on a certain date and it was . Unfortunately , he died a few days after .
That is a great question ! If your claim is denied , the first thing to do is find out why . If all that is needed is a police report , or something easily fixed , then you can get that accomplished , and resubmit the claim . You can always appeal the decision also , but if you need the car fixed top drive it , be aware that sometimes appealing can be a lengthy process . Get with your agent , and have them help you get the issue resolved . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Always . You do n't have to wait for your renewal date , either . Whatever happened that makes you want to switch does n't matter . It 's your home and your choice as to whom you choose to insure it . Just be sure to go about it in the correct manner . The first step is to find a new agent , one you can trust . It does n't really matter if it 's an independent agent or an agent that only writes through one company . Most good companies wo n't be that far apart so choose your agent first . Find one that cares and can explain everything to you and take their advice . Then you can cancel your current policy . The correct way to do this is to write them a letter requesting the policy to be cancelled and choose the effective date of the new policy . They 'll cancel your policy and send you back any unused premium . This will usually take a week or so before you receive your refund check .
ABN stays for Advanced Benificiary Notice of Noncoverage . A doctor or Medcare provide may give you an ABN if they believe Medicare may not pay for the service you require . The ABN lists the services and items that Medicare isn ; ' t expected to pay for , an estimate of their cost and what Medicare may not pay for them . There are 3 options for you to choose from on the ABN form . 1 . You want the item or service , the provider may ask you to pay for them but you want a claim submitted to Medicare . The claim may be denied , you may be responsible to pay the provider but you can file an appeal to Medicare . Option 2 : You want the items or service but you do not want the provider to make a claim to Medicare . You may be asked to pay for the items or serivce now . Since the provider did not file a cliam to Medicare you can not file an appeal . Option 3 : You do not want the item or servce trhat may not be paid for by Medicare .
SAGA Home Insurance is a foreign company doing business in the U. S. that supposedly caters to the over 50 market . The first question I would have is the cultural differences that could be built into the policy that you would not know about until you had a claim . The marketing `` over 50 '' concept is an obvious push to appeal to the more established individual that has assets and therefore insuring a more expensive home . Companies like CHUBB , Hartford , and certainly State Farm has not failed to recognize that market . A foreign company would really have to compete for my business and they would have to convince me that there policies incorporate the values we expect in the U. S. . Am I saying that the policies are bad-no , not at all . I am saying you are going to do your due diligence if you decide to spend your money with a foreign company . What guarantees do you have that a policy dispute you may have can be successfully negotiated when you are dealing with a foreign company . Contrast that against your ability to appeal the decision of a U S Company direct to your DOI vs. having to hire an attorney .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is The Declaration Page Of A Homeowners Insurance Policy ?
The Declarations Page -LRB- also referred to as the ` dec page ' -RRB- on a Homeowners policy is the title page which details the Named Insured , the Term of Coverage , the Insured Mailing & Property Address and the Limits of Coverage for each Section . If there is a mortgage on the property , the mortgagee should be listed on the declarations page ; this is particularly important because the insurance carrier will mail the ` Mortgagee Copy ' of the declarations page to the address listed with the account number listed being the reference to the mortgage company . Each insured person should check to make sure that this information is correct in order to avert unnecessary communication with the mortgage company .
Located near the front of the policy , the declaration page lists the information that personalizes the coverage found in the following pages . It also lists all the forms that comprise the policy . This is sort of a table of contents . Your mortgage company will want a copy of this page of your policy . You should review it carefully as it contains a great deal of very important information When you look at the declaration page you can identify the name of the insurance company . Agents often represent multiple companies and this tells you exactly which company is insuring your home . Here you will find the policy number which represents the individual nature of the contract . The declaration page will describe the type of policy . There are several different forms of homeowners policies and this will tell you which form is being used . The declaration page will identify who is being insured . This is very important , particularly when there is a liability claim . The named insured should read like the deed to the property . The property should be clearly identified . There may be more than one insured and their relationship is often included in the declaration . This is where the mortgage company will be identified and the address of the company will be included , along with the loan number . Additional mortgagees can also be listed here with the same information . The name and address of the agent handling the policy also appears in the same general area . This is where you can go for service on the policy . The declarations make very important statements setting the coverage limits . While they are often identified by letters -LRB- A-M -RRB- there will be definitions in the subsequent pages . This shows the limit of each of the coverages in the policy . It usually shows the limit of liability . It usually shows the deductible applied to property claims , and states the annual premium for the policy . There is a lengthy list of forms that comprise the bulk of the policy . These attached pages detail exactly the nature and extent of the coverages , and the limits and exclusions that apply . As a homeowner you should look down this list and ask the agent to explain any coverage that you dont understand . This can trigger conversations about additional available coverages that might be appropriate for you and which you should have . This is a very important section and one that you dont want to overlook . After this is usually a general description of the property itself . It will identify the fire district , location of the nearest fire hydrant , proximity to a fire station and the protection class used to develop the premium . It will probably comment on the roof and indicate if there is any special rating applied . The company has relied on this information much of which youre provided and it should be correct . It is quite likely that your state has laws that require certain notifications to be on the declaration page , perhaps warning you that the policy does not cover flood , earthquake or building code upgrade coverage . Finally the declaration page will identify the company , its address , telephone number and state who is paying the premium and the address where communications are being sent .
All insurance polices have declarations pages . This is the page that declares your coverage 's . Usually this page on the front part of your policy -LRB- one of the first pages -RRB- and is one or maybe two pages long . The declarations page does not break down how the coverage 's work but simply state the coverage 's . It is important to note if you do not see a certain coverage on the declarations page you can bet you do not have this coverage .
The Declarations Page -LRB- also referred to as the ` dec page ' -RRB- on a Homeowners policy is the title page which details the Named Insured , the Term of Coverage , the Insured Mailing & Property Address and the Limits of Coverage for each Section . If there is a mortgage on the property , the mortgagee should be listed on the declarations page ; this is particularly important because the insurance carrier will mail the ` Mortgagee Copy ' of the declarations page to the address listed with the account number listed being the reference to the mortgage company . Each insured person should check to make sure that this information is correct in order to avert unnecessary communication with the mortgage company .
The Declaration page of a Homeowners ' Policy is the page that outlines the coverage that is particular to your home . The Declaration -LRB- Dec -RRB- page includes the policy number and the date your policy began . It lists you as the policyholder and both your mailing and location address . It goes on to state the current property amounts including your Dwelling , Other Structures and Personal Property as well as any `` inside limits '' that may be stated for particular categories of personal property such as jewelry , fine arts , fire arms etc. . The policy Dec will state your policy deductible for property coverage and the settlement option -LRB- usually Replacement Guarantee -RRB- . Next it will state the amount of Liability coverage you have as well as any Medical Payment protection . The Dec will also show the property rating territory , proximity to a fire hydrant and fire protection class . Finally , the premium will be listed .
A homeowners policy is a package of forms that identify the coverage the company is extending on the property . They are not specific to your property . The declaration page identifies all of the parties in the policy and states the absolute limits of the policy . This is the part of the legal contract that customizes the forms into an understandable whole . The declaration page is what makes the policy yours .
A Home Insurance declarations page also known as the ` dec page'is the cover page or summary to the limits of coverage afforded on your specific insurance policy . This page will include the Named Insured , Mailing Address , Property Address , Policy Number , Effective and Expiration Dates , Customer Service Contact Telephone Number , Claim Service Contact Telephone Number and Limits of Coverage . In addition , the declarations page usually includes the Policy Form Number which is the main policy form usually written by the ISO -LRB- Insurance Services Office -RRB- including all definitions , conditions and exclusions along with all the including endorsements that may be included with the policy . If there is a Mortgagee listed on the policy , the Mortgagee Clause will also be listed with the Name , Address & Loan Number of the mortgagee where a copy of the policy and all communication will also be directed . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The declarations page of any insurance policy regardless of whether it is home , auto , life or health , is the page that contains your basic policy information . It will usually be titled declarations page and will show your policy number , coverage 's , and company contact information . It is basically a summary of your policy .
You can find out who your homeowner 's insurance is with by looking at the declarations page which will list your coverage , mortgage company and the insurer . If you ca n't find the declaration 's page , contact your mortgage company since they will likely have a record of it . If that fails , start calling different insurers !
The start date of a homeowners policy is clearly displayed on the declaration page . The actual declaration page might not reach you for a few days ; however , most agents have binding authority and can issue a certificate of insurance which includes this start date for coverage . This is particularly important when there is a real estate closing .
The life insurance policy at purchase should meet your personal unique needs . Isthe face amountadequate to cover my loved ones financial needs such as debt , income replacement or for a business the key person 's value to the company ? If cash value plans does it meet the retirement goals you were aiming for ? Once the policy is purchased the components of the policy to look for are , first the declaration page . This is one of the first pages of the policy and is a summary of coverage . the death benefit , premiums paid , terms and dates concerning your coverage . Next look for the illustration pages . These pages explain any cash value building in your policy or if term the guarantee lengths of premiums and any future rate increases . Lastly find the terms and conditions page . This page explains any exemptions , waivers or riders on your policy . Your loved ones should not be surprised at an untimely death that a benefit is eliminated or reduced . Always seek advice of a professional broker to avoid any unexpected issues .
A homeowners policy is a compilation of forms . The declaration pages of the policy state which forms are applicable . The company maintains copies of the declarations and the forms for many years . It is highly unlikely that you would have any difficulty reconstituting a homeowners policy that you had several years ago . Maintaining copies of expired policies is probably not a good use of a storage cabinet .
The declarations contain the specific information that tailors the homeowners policy to be your homeowners policy . It lists you and your lender ; it has the limits , prices and other important information . There is a list on the declaration that shows pages that are attached to comprise the entire policy . That list can be quite important and should not be overlooked when you receive your policy .
An suto insurance declaration page is one oart of what is considered the complete insurance contract . The declaration page specifically states the name of the insuring company , policy number and the effective and expiration date of the policy . It also lists the named insured -LRB- s -RRB- , identifies the vehicle or vehicles that are insured by the policy and the specific coverage provided to each car . Finally , it includes the term premium that is charged for the coverage provided . The complete insurance contract also includes the `` Policy Jacket '' and any amendments . Be sure to read through the complete contract and discuss it with your insurance professional to be sure you understand all the terms and conditions .
A Declaration Page , also referred to as a `` Dec Page , '' tells you the most pertinent parts of your policy . Along with containing the personal information -LRB- name , dob , address , etc. -RRB- , it also lists your policy number , effective date , summarizes the coverage amount and states the premium . Any changes -LRB- endorsements -RRB- or discounts will also be listed on this page . The dec page also provides information on the insurance company , including how to contact them , where to call for claims , etc. .
A `` Declarations Page '' in any insurance policy is simply the page in the policy that states what the insurance company is insuring and what benefits will payable if the insured incurs a loss and also covers details like `` what if the insured causes the loss due to negligence ' and a life insurance policy in most cases will state in the case of `` suicide '' the policy will not pay
There are two types of life insurance fundamentally , term life insurance and permanent life insurance . Term insurance has no cash value with an exception of a return of premium rider at the end of the term . Permanent life insurance comes with different names . the most popular are whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . These all have a cash value component . Open your policy to the declaration page . This page will tell you the type of policy you have . If you find it is a permanent plan mentioned above , then turn over to the illustrations page . These pages will give you the cash value of at each policy year with the cash value of your plan .
The Declaration Page of your policy outlines your specific coverage for the policy as issued by your insurance company . The `` Dec Page '' will show the effective date that the policy period began as well as it 's expiration date which is usually 1 year later . It will list your mortgage company and will also include your name and mailing address as well as the property address if different . It will then list the specific coverage for you dwelling , personal property , additional structures and Liability as well as the property deductible . If there are any it will list any inside limits to certain categories of personal property like jewelry , camera equipment etc. . Finally it will list the distance you are to a fire hydrant and/or fire station and the Fire rating classification as well as your annual premium . Your complete policy consists of the declaration , the Policy Jacket which outlines the broad language coverage that the policy provides as well as it limitations and exclusions , and any applicable endorsements .
A Homeowners Declaration Page is a document that clearly identifies the particular location and coverage provided by the Insuring Company on your home . There are a number of common elements to these documents . Your name and address and the location address will be listed . You will also find the policy number and both inception and expiration date of your poilicy period . Homeowners policies are usually and most commonly issued for a one year period that will renew on the anniversary date continuously unless you decide to change carriers or if your home no longer qualifies under the Insurance Company guidelines . Your mortgage company will be listed on the declaration sheet as they are an interested party . Coverage as it applies to your dwelling , personal property , additional structures and property deductible will be listed as will the amount of primary Liability coverage you choose . Optional policy coverage and limits may also be listed . Talk to your Insurance Professional about all of the terms and conditions of your policy to make sure you have the coverage you need , are taking advantage of all available discounts and options available to you .
A declaration page would show coverage had been purchased , when it had been purchased and when it would expire . However I would not accept a declaration page as proof of Renters Insurance or any insurance for that matter . I would not accept it because there is no guarantee that the Insured or Renter will make the next payment for the policy . If he does n't , the policy would cancel and you wo n't know . If I want proof that coverage is in force , I would request a Certificate of Insurance and I would also request I be named as Certificate Holder . If I 'm named Certificate Holder , the insurance company may -LRB- depends on State Regulations -RRB- be obligated to tell you when coverage is threatened to be canceled . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will I Lose Medicare If I Get A Job ?
No . You can continue to receive Medicare healthcare benefits whether you go back to work or remain a retired individual . You have the option of securing group coverage again and can continue your Medicare benefits as well . Generally , in this scenario , the group health insurance pays first and Medicare pays second .
Medicare is available and is almost mandatory for everyone over age 65 . Your employer will normally have included that consideration when the company adopted a health insurance program . You will probably be required to enroll in Medicare part A . There is n't a cost for most participants . If you are receiving medical benefits from your employer you may be allowed to defer the purchase of Medicare part B . You can usually defer that until you end your employment and lose medical benefits . It is important that you contact Medicare when you are leaving employment so that the switch to Medicare B is seamless and your coverage is at the standard price . There is a penalty if you enroll late
Once upon a time there was a very rich man . He owned a number of businesses which he had started himself and which he had built himself . Altogether , he employed close to 20,000 people . That means he created opportunities for 20,000 people to support their families and lead their own lives . He understood that he could never have built his business empire without the dedication , hard work , and loyalty of each and every one of those men and women . He took good care of them . He paid them well . Lots of bonuses , lots of benefits . He was very community-minded . He knew that no man , and no family , was an island unto itself . We need each other . We need each other in times of natural disasters , and human tragedy , and family distress . When people lose their job , or get sick , or maybe lose their home , they need a helping hand . He always made sure his hand was ready to give . He took it upon himself to help many , many people . He gave generously to community service organizations . He made sure that families who were suffering had the means to weather the storm and remain together . When people in need came to him , he helped them get back on to their own two feet . He was an extremely dedicated family man . He loved his wife dearly . He was always there for his children . Everything he did was really for them . He wanted them to have the best of everything . He especially wanted his son and daughter to have a great jump-start in life . His entire estate the houses , the businesses , the valuables - was going to go to them when he passed away . One day he had a lunch meeting with his friend who was an estate planning attorney . His friend made the following observation : You know , you are quite a person . You have done such a tremendous job building a life for yourself . All the people you employ , all the people you help . How fortunate your family is to have you as a provider . But heres the problem : God forbid you die tomorrow , this entire wonderful world you have built collapses . Without you and your broad shoulders , the entire enterprise stops in its tracks . You can imagine that our friend the Rich Man didnt like hearing that at all . He had indeed put so much of himself into what he held to be precious . It would almost be an act of betrayal for them to lose it all when he died . I mean , shouldnt he make provisions for their care after his death ? Why shouldnt the show go on ? So many people have become dependent on him . So , he bought a bunch of life insurance . Life insurance to make sure his family wouldnt have to sell half his assets just to pay the governments estate tax bill . They wouldnt have to sell the residences or family jewels . The heirlooms could stay in the family . He bought life insurance to enable his businesses to keep running . People would be able to keep their jobs . Vendors would get paid . Clients would receive service . The management team would have enough money to keep going and growing . He bought life insurance to fill the coffers of charities doing noble work in his community . Hungry people could get fed . Homeless people could get shelter . Unemployed people get retrained for new jobs . Life insurance made it possible for the great work this man had been doing to continue . And because life insurance is such a great deal financially , the cost of this planning was literally pennies on the dollar . Each dollar of life insurance benefit literally cost him a few cents . Of course , it was this financial wisdom and eagerness to take advantage of a great deal that made him rich in the first place :-RRB- Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
If you have your life insurance through your place of employment - you lose it . This is why I always encourage my clients to purchase their own policy -LRB- not in the name of their employment -RRB- so that if they change jobs , they will not lose their life insurance . If one of the benefits of your job is a life insurance policy and you DO N'T HAVE TO PAY FOR IT , then it is fine to have - but remember , if you lose your job , you also lose this insurance . If you do pay for it , some companies will offer you the chance to keep it , but you must set up a payment plan or remember to pay the bill each month . To avoid the these headaches , it is recommended that you purchase your own policy and talk to an agent to find the best one for you . You can often get more for your money if you purchase your own anyways . Many companies out there with many different types of plans - some better than others - but all can be very confusing to the average consumer , so again , it is best to talk to your Agent about what policy best fits you and your families needs .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
If you are still working after you turn 65 -LRB- or your spouse is still working -RRB- for a company with 20 or more full-time workers and you get health insurance from them , you may not need to enroll in Medicare when you turn 65 . You can delay Part B and Part D and get them later on when you retire or if you lose your job-related insurance . You can enroll in Part A because it is free but it probably wont pay much towards your healthcare cost because Part A pays after your job insurance . Talk with the people in your human resources department before enrolling in Medicare Part B . If they tell you their insurance not Medicare will be primary then I would not enroll in Medicare Part B.
Often this question is approached by , how much can you afford ? I would like you to think of it as , How much can you afford to lose . I have been driving over 50 years . I have had one minor fender bender 46 years ago . Had I never purchased insurance -LRB- in California I have the option of posting a bond or cash -RRB- I would have saved approximately $ 90,000 . However , a recent accident involving a pedestrian struck in a cross walk resulted in a settlement of over $ 750,000 . I couldnt have afforded the settlement , so I paid the premiums . What can you afford to lose ? Buy the insurance that will protect you from those amounts that you can not afford to lose . If you can qualify for an umbrella consider limits in the $ 1-2 million range . In our lawsuit happy society that is not being overly cautious .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
That is an excellent question ! I am really glad that you asked . Many people believe that because they have a life insurance policy through their employer that they are fine . Unfortunately , if they lose the job , they find that they also are no longer insured . A policy purchased outside of the workplace remains , even when you take another job . It 's `` portable '' , in the sense that it `` travels '' along with you . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! The best thing to do is go to the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- website , www.healthcare.gov and walk through the questions to see if you qualify . Start by entering your zip code and county , and follow the very simple prompts . It will tell you if you qualify for a policy . There are several qualifying events - gaining or losing a spouse or child , losing a job or income , moving out of a previously covered area , losing your coverage , even gaining citizenship or being released from incarceration . Give it a shot , and if you need help , feel free to click on my profile and contact me , I 'd be happy to walk through it with you . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
There are many reasons that people can be denied life insurance , but unfortunately , people sometimes get denied for reasons that could have been avoided . Avoidable declines are often due to agents who do not do a thorough job in asking questions of their clients before applying . But denials can also be a result of clients who lie or hide information , hoping to pay a better price . Most often , clients simply do not think that something matters -LRB- e.g. bankruptcy -RRB- , or are not aware of what is in their medical records -LRB- e.g. CHF instead of high blood pressure -RRB- . Ironically , one would think that the simplified issue policies that you apply for by mail would be the simplest to get , because they have the least questions and no exam to trip you up . But I find that these are a source of many declines , due to their ambiguous wording , or people not taking the time to read the instructions well . I have been writing mostly impaired risk life insurance online for over 10 years , so have written thousands of policies for people with health conditions . But just when I get to feeling good about so many cases getting approved as I quoted , I will get hit with a decline out of left field that I did not see coming . Sometimes , it just seems impossible to avoid them . But a good agent should not have a lot of them , or they are not probably doing their job as they should .
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
No , life insurance rates are non-negotiable to the extent that you can not ask for a discount . Likewise , all agents must charge the same rates . When you see an agency advertising affordable rates , what we mean is that we can shop multiple companies to place you with the one that is most favorable for your health and age . When you see an agency broadcasting extremely low prices for life insurance , what they are doing is quoting the best rate for the shortest term . Most brokers have access to those same companies and rates , and applying with one agency over another will not cause you to qualify for a discount . What does matter in life insurance rates is matching up with an agency who understands your situation and can help your policy be placed at the best possible rate . This starts with putting your application with the right company , and it ends with seeing that policy through to the end . If your doctor has retired and moved to the Bahamas and no one can find the medical records required to get your policy approved , this agency will track them down or work with the underwriter to get you approved without them . If you are rated up due to an error on your MIB , they will help you get it corrected and go back for a lower rate . If your spouse loses their job and you can no longer afford the 30 year term policy you were approved for , they help you get the 10 year term until you are back on your feet . While insurance agents can not negotiate life insurance rates , we can be responsible and knowledgeable and help you get the lowest rates by simply doing our job correctly and thoroughly .
You should get Disability Insurance as soon as you have a job that you depend on for living expenses . If you were to lose your job due to a disability , it could be a year before you qualify for Social Security Disability , and that payment will not be as high as what you can get through a private DI policy . Disability Insurance will pay more and sooner than SSDI , and will pay a benefit for both temporary and permanent disabilities .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
In the vast majority of situations the answer is no . Medicaid is a state-run insurance program designed to help low income persons pay for their health care . As a general rule you must not be able to afford to pay for private health insurance in order to qualify for Medicaid . However , this is a government program we 're talking about so there are always some exceptions buried in the fine print . This is where things can get complicated and the rules can vary from state to state in some situations . Some state Medicaid programs will assist in paying private insurance premiums for a person who can not fully pay them . A low income person who has recently lost their job and their health insurance through their former job may be eligible for assistance in paying their COBRA premiums in some states . You would have to check with your state 's Medicaid office to learn what the rules are in your particular state . Also , you have a limited amount of time to apply for such assistance after losing your job in states that provide this type of assistance so time is of the essence . Medicaid also has a special program for people diagnosed with AIDS that may qualify them for premium payment assistance . Once again , you will need to check with your state 's Medicaid office to determine what their policies and procedures are for qualifying for such assistance .
That is a great question ! There are some reasons why taking a loan out of your 401k might not be the best option . Before doing so , please consult your plan administrator and be certain to understand the rules for your particular plan . The first reason is that you may lose the ability to contribute to your fund while your loan is outstanding . Some companies will disallow contributions or matches until the loan is repaid . That can seriously derail your long term growth potential of your plan . Other companies will deduct the loan payments from your check , reducing your flexibility with other payments . The second reason is that you lose your tax sheltered advantage . The interest that you are paying yourself on the loan -LRB- you are both borrower and lender in the transaction -RRB- is considered a taxable income by the IRS , and reduces your returns . It 's also possible that the opportunity cost of having invested that repaid interest could be more than what you 'd make having used it in an investment . The third reason is that if you were to God forbid lose your job , the loan amount is repayable within 60 days . If that is n't done , you are subject to a 10 % penalty on the balance , -LRB- if you 're under 591/2 -RRB- and are due for whatever State and Federal taxes apply , as it is no longer considered a loan , but an early withdrawal . An alternative to consider might be a home equity line of credit , if the interest rates and your equity allow . Some things to consider . Again , I 'd advise you to speak with your plan administrator and see exactly what your plan rules are . Thanks for asking !
To answer your question requires us to consider the requirements under law for the family medical leave act . The FMLA imposes upon employers certain obligations to provide the employee unpaid leave from their job without fear of losing their job . Employees continue to enjoy employer provided medical benefits as if they are active at work . Maternity leave is an eligible medical event . Employees are entitled to up to twelve work weeks of leave in a 52 week year . Seek out more information by searching the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 for more information . Now , as to obtaining an `` extended , paid maternity leave from your job '' , you seem to be asking on whether there is a way to buy an extended period of benefit for a group , employer sponsored medical or disability income program . I have not encountered this option as a benefit in 38 years of work in this industry but , the best option is to contact the benefits administrator or Human Resources at your employer with this question . No optional benefit available will waive the rights or duties of the employer under common policy and practice , nor under the FLMA of 1993 . There are indemnification type health insurance policies that may provide some cash benefit , and you can buy disability insurance prior to the pregancy that can cover medical as a disability , but they wo n't impact the employer benefits nor their right to expect you to return to work when their maternity leave expires . The indemnity policies and disability insurance will have specific underwriting requirements and being currently pregnant is likely to be a condition that prohibits a benefit until the pregnancy runs its course .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Where Do You Buy Renters Insurance ?
You buy a renters insurance policy from a trusted insurance agent . If you dont have an agent get recommendations from your friends , colleagues and neighbors . The agent should listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . The agent will help you choose appropriate limits of coverage . The time of loss is not the time to discover that your limits were not adequate .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Where we may find it difficult to define ` Best ' Renters Insurance ; we believe the best renters insurance would be the most comprehensive coverage for a competitive premium rate . We believe in most States , this coverage lies in the hands of Renters Insurance Online available through Stillwater Insurance Group . We have an Online Link for consumers to obtain a quote , choose options and purchase the insurance policy online . If the definition of ` Best ' is ` Cheapest ' ; the easiest method to generate a Cheap Renters Insurance quote is to select a low amount of coverage with a high deductible . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States at : WEBSITELINK
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
A landlord can not make you buy anything you do not want to buy , but they require that you purchase renters insurancewithin the agreement or lease that you signif you want to rent the property that they have to rent . Renters insurance is typically a very low cost insurance and if you combine your auto insurance and renters insurance with one carrier the discount on the auto may almost pay for the renters .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Renters Insurance covers the Personal Property of the Insured Tenant , offers Loss of Use for a covered hazard and provides Personal Liability for the Insured Tenant and resident family . The Renters Insurance Policy is commonly known as a Form HO4 and is available in all States . Renters Insurance is mandatory in a few States where the Government has been faced with an unusually high number of law suits thus inundating the legal system ; in other States , you will find some Landlords require tenants to purchase the insurance to provide a layer of protection for the possible negligent acts of a tenant causing property damage to the building , property of other tenants or inadvertent bodily injury to others . The possession of Renters Insurance is a display of genuine responsibility for one 's personal property and protection for others . Renters Insurance Online is available online in multiple States at the following link : WEBSITELINK In order to produce a lower premium , it is recommended only to purchase the minimum amount of Personal Contents coverage to sufficiently replace the personal property of the insured and to select a high deductible . This combination will generate a comparatively lower premium ; renters insurance is written for an annual term and is fairly inexpensive .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Policies Be Contested ?
Life insurance has a two year contestable period after which it is extremely difficult for life insurance policies to be contested . Even during the first two years , the insurance company can only deny coverage for material misstatements -LRB- information that was withheld from , or misstated on , the application that is serious enough that it would have caused the policy to be altered or denied -RRB- . Other things that might cause a life insurance policy to be contested are questions as to whether the policy was in force at the time of death , or death as the result of suspicious circumstances -LRB- e.g.suspected suicide in the first two years , or murder of the insured by a beneficiary -RRB- . Most life insurance policies will never be contested because death will occur after the two year period . For those that are contested , very few ever result in the death benefit not being paid .
Yes , there is a two year contestable period on life insurance policies . If death occurs during this time , the insurance company will review medical records closely before paying the claim . Some simplified issue companies have a history of not paying claims on a high percent of contestable claims . A small number of companies actually release to the public the percent of contestable claims that they paid last year . As you would expect , those companies pay the highest % of them .
Life insurance has a two year contestable period after which it is extremely difficult for life insurance policies to be contested . Even during the first two years , the insurance company can only deny coverage for material misstatements -LRB- information that was withheld from , or misstated on , the application that is serious enough that it would have caused the policy to be altered or denied -RRB- . Other things that might cause a life insurance policy to be contested are questions as to whether the policy was in force at the time of death , or death as the result of suspicious circumstances -LRB- e.g.suspected suicide in the first two years , or murder of the insured by a beneficiary -RRB- . Most life insurance policies will never be contested because death will occur after the two year period . For those that are contested , very few ever result in the death benefit not being paid .
After the contestability clause in the policy ends the answer is `` yes '' an insurance company will pay a claim even if suicide was involved . Some states reduce the contestability period down from two years to one . The contestability clause or contestability period is the period of time an insurance carrier can call into question any answer provided in an application by the insured , The insurance carrier can also create temporary exclusions to be in effect during that period of time . If false information is found during this period , a policy can be resended , premiums returned , claim or not . Same for an stated act declared in the policy . Always a good idea to review exclusions page of any insurance policy . After that period has ended , the insurance company can not contest something like a suicide .
Anything can be contested . Will the contest be upheld ? it will all depend on the circumstances surrounding the reason for it being contested . This is best answered from a legal professional as the insurance contract is a contract and if it were contested legal counsel may be consulted . Sometimes family members contest a beneficiary when they feel it was an error for that person to be named beneficiary . Overall beneficiaries have not had to deal with their desigantion as beneficiary to an insurance policy being contested .
A carrier can contest a death claim during the two year contestability period , even beyond that period for fraud . Some beneficiaries have contested the change in beneficiaries , not only by the policy owner , but by those given power of attorney to act on behalf of the policy owner . There have been cases where the policy owners will is in conflict with the stated policy benefices , resulting the parties contesting each others rightful position .
The answer will vary depending on the reason for the contest . Typically a policy is contested if the Insurer believes that what they originally approved -LRB- the insured current condition at time of policy issue -RRB- and what actually is does not match . Lets say an applicant dies from a form of cancer and it was determined that they had this condition for years and knew about it . If it was disclosed prior to policy issuance and the policy was issued anyway , there would be no reason to contest . But if it was not disclosed and the Insurance company would have denied issuing the policy had they known it will be contested . One of the best way to ensure this does not happen is to be honest when applying . Insurance companies have to evaluate risk before issuing a policy . If they feel it is an acceptable risk they will issue a policy . If not it will be denied . I hope this answers your question .
what will void a life insurance policy ? Basically any deciet given during the application process will void a policy if found out within the first two policy years . After that , in most cases contestability by an insurance carrier has ended . Except some states have modified contestibility laws sometimes in the insurance company 's favor . In my state , concerning lying about smoking on the application , there is no limit for an insurance company to contest . The state considers the policy null and void . Other states may have something similar .
Depending on the state you live in the contestability portion of a life policy may be one to two years . After this period of time , unless otherwise stated within the policy exceptions , a policy will pay the benefit to the persons named as beneficiaires within the policy . Prior to the stated contestability period end , an overdose would be investigated for intentional or accidental . If found to be intentional within that contestability period , premiums paid would usually be refunded , but no claim paid .
All life insurance policies have a two year contestable period . It is the first two years after the policy goes into effect . During the two year contestable period , if death would occur , the insurance company will review the claim to make sure that the health and personal information on the application was correct . If there was a misrepresentation on the application that would have caused the price to be changed or policy to be declined , the policy may not pay the death benefit . During the contestable period , the policy will also not pay for death by suicide .
Life insurance covers the life of the insured . There are a few exclusions within the first two years . These two years are known as the contestability period . This time period gives the life insurance carrier time to investigate as cause of death to see if an illness was missed during the underwriting period . Another common cause of death to be excluded under the contestability period is a suicide . After the two year contestability period most companies will pay the death benefit regardless of the cause of death unless fraud can be explicitly proven or an activity such as racing , skydiving , rock climbing , etc. is excluded upon issue of the coverage .
To contest a life insurance beneficiary , you must hire legal representation and prepare to be in for a long haul . It is unusual that the court will side with the one contesting the beneficiary . However , if you can prove that a major life event occurred and that the policy owner neglected to make the beneficiary change , sometimes the challenge will work . Some are able to use arbitration to settle such disputes . It is easier to contest a beneficiary if the beneficiary has not financial interest with the policy owner .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
Yes , there is a two year contestable period on life insurance policies . If death occurs during this time , the insurance company will review medical records closely before paying the claim . Some simplified issue companies have a history of not paying claims on a high percent of contestable claims . A small number of companies actually release to the public the percent of contestable claims that they paid last year . As you would expect , those companies pay the highest % of them .
Traditional term life insurance covers deaths that occur by both illness and injury . If you have a Accidental Death and Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- life insurance policy , then the death benefit will only pay proceeds if death occurs under accidental means -LRB- e.g. a car accident -RRB- . If you die by illness -LRB- e.g. heart attack , cancer , etc. -RRB- and are only covered by an AD&D life insurance policy , then no proceeds will be paid out . Please note , during the first 2 years of any life insurance policy , there is what 's called a `` contestability period '' in which if death occurs by suicide or it 's discovered upon review that the applicant intentionally lied on an application -LRB- committing fraud -RRB- , then the carrier can refuse to pay out a claim . After the 2 year contestability period has expired , then the carrier can not challenge these types of issues upon a claim . The reason for the contestability period is 2 years is deemed a fair amount of time for someone who thinks about committing suicide would have gotten help and tried to move past it by that point and carriers would have had enough time to find issues with a policy if fraud was present . If you 're looking for life insurance , I would suggest consulting with an experienced and knowledgeable independent insurance broker who can discuss your needs of coverage and what goals you want to have met with it while also comparing multiple insurance companies to secure the coverage at the lowest possible cost . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance policies in most states with a few exceptions have a contestability clause on suicide . The method of suicide is irrelevant . Most contestability clauses are two years from the effective date . Yes , if the cause of death were to be ruled a suicide and the coverage has been in force of two years the death benefit most likely would be paid . If the gunshot wound were ruled by a coroner as accidental or homicide the contestability clause would not be effected and benefits would be paid in almost all cases .
Life insurance claims can be denied but it is very rare for a life insurance company to not pay the death benefit proceeds if the life insured has died and proof of death has been submitted . If death was by suicide or a material misrepresentation in the first two policy years of the policy , the claim will be investigated . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in very limited circumstances of fraud .
Okay it is time for lawyer to answer this question , not an insurance agent . With that disclaimer made , in my experience , I have heard of a beneficiary being contested . One of my former clients had gotten a divorce and then remarried , having never informed me as to his change in marital status , no changes were ever made to his life policy . He then suddenly passed away , and his new wife called me to file a claim on his policy . I realized then that she was not a named beneficiary , his ex-wife was . Well , to make matters more interesting his ex-wife called and asked if the policy was still in force . I helped the named beneficiary -LRB- ex-wife -RRB- file a claim for the death benefit . His new wife told me that she was going to contest this in court and had a hired a lawyer . I notified the insurance company as to the problems , and they held off on paying the claim until a resolution was reached . The case never made it to court and the ex-wife split the proceeds equally with the new wife . So does that mean that it can be contested ? At the time I was told by the Insurance company 's attorney , that they could be , but that it was rarely done . He also said that between a will and a beneficiary provision , a will was easier to break than a beneficiary provision on a life policy .
Yes , life insurance in force at the death of the life insured pays out the death benefit proceeds once proof of death has been submitted . The life insurer can not deny a claim unless due to either suicide in the first two policy years or a material misrepresentation in the first two years of the policy . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . Life insurance is something you need to qualify for in advance - the insured must be insurable , the owner must have an insurable interest , etc. . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in cases of fraud .
Basically it comes down to either suicide or a material misrepresentation in the first two policy years of the policy . It is rare for a life insurance company to not pay a death claim -LRB- in which case they would return premiums paid with interest -RRB- . Life insurance is something you need to qualify for in advance - the insured must be insurable , the owner must have an insurable interest , etc. . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not contest a claim after the first two years of a policy .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Do Life Insurance Proceeds Go Through Probate ?
Life insurance death benefit proceeds go direct to the policy beneficiaries . The beneficiary declaration in the application is the directive to the life insurance company on death benefit distributions . There is also an option for contingent beneficiary as well . Avoiding probate is another feature of life insurance coverage .
You may elect to name a trust as beneficiary to achieve some planning goals for the ultimate beneficiary , such as ` spendthrift ' protection . In such a case , you have made a deliberate decision to use the probate system . You are well advised to give serious consideration to this idea if you have younger beneficiaries .
As long as a beneficiary is designated , no . If there is no beneficiary , the proceeds default to the estate which means probate . Having a named beneficiary rather than the estate of the insured allows the property to pass by contract directly to heirs without the need for probate . Its effect generally supersedes anything that a will or trust might say . It is also a good idea to consider naming at least one contingent -LRB- backup -RRB- beneficiary and have the insurer confirm the identity of all beneficiaries at least every three years . Clients are often surprised to find they have existing policies with beneficiaries who are deceased which means the estate would get the proceeds and be subjected to probate .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does life insurance go through probate ? Generally , when a policy insured dies , he or she has beneficiaries . Those beneficiaries generally see the proceeds direct to them , bypassing probate . I love this because those proceeds then generally , by the way absolutely tax free , go to their beneficiaries without having the interference or going through the steps of probate . What that means is that that money , when it comes direct , the beneficiaries can use that money as they see fit . So there 's no dictate from probate how it 's done , how it 's used , or that it has to go through state probate first . It generally goes to the beneficiaries , and then they can use that to pay off indebtedness or to put money aside for future obligations . And that 's why I like it , because its one of the perks of life insurance . It generally goes directly to beneficiaries and not through probate .
Not usually . As long as the policy has a named beneficiary who is alive when the insured dies the proceeds will normally skip the probate process . If there are no living beneficiaries when the insured dies , then the proceeds are paid to the insured 's estate at which time the funds would need to go through the probate process in order to be distributed to heirs . Keep in mind that proceeds paid to a deceased beneficiary could end up in that beneficiary 's estate and would need to go through the probate process in order for that beneficiary 's heirs to receive the proceeds .
Life insurance proceeds generally do not have to go through probate unless they are left to the estate . If the beneficiary is listed on the policy as `` estate '' , or if the persons who were listed as beneficiaries are no longer alive , then the life insurance proceeds will go through probate . If the proceeds are left to a living person , they will be paid to that person directly , bypassing probate .
Life insurance proceeds can go the estate of the insured on purpose or by accident but there is no reason they should . Naming a beneficiary and reviewing periodically is usually the right thing to do . If the estate is the beneficiary , the access of the heirs to any money associated with the life insurance policy is delayed because the money must go through probate . Probate may , in some cases , cause a delay of a year or more . Life insurance proceeds left to the estate , like any asset left to the estate , are forced through the probate process and therefore become part of the public record , so privacy is lost . Perhaps most importantly , in most states , the money paid into probate becomes subject to the claims of creditors of the estate .
Creditors can not reach life insurance proceeds to pay off the debts of the deceased insured person unless the beneficiary of the policy was not a person . I.e. . If the insured named his/her `` estate '' as the beneficiary , then the policy proceeds go through probate , giving creditors for the deceased , access to those funds . If the beneficiary is a person , the life insurance proceeds do not usually go through probate , but directly to that person . Creditors can not reach the money that went to the beneficiary unless the beneficiary shared the debt with the deceased .
If there is no beneficiary cited on a life insurance policy -LRB- or the beneficiary is the estate -RRB- , the proceeds are paid to the estate . From there , they will go through the probate process if there is no instruction for how the proceeds are to be distributed - when this happens , the courts would decide how the estate is to be distributed . If a beneficiary is designated , then the proceeds would be paid to that person -LRB- s -RRB- / entity rather than going through the probate process .
To expand a bit ... Life insurance proceeds are among a class of assets that `` pass by contract '' at death ; in this case , the contract is the insurance policy with its beneficiary designation . -LRB- Other assets that pass by contract include IRAs / Qualified Retirement Plans , annuities , jointly-owned bank or investment accounts , etc. -RRB- Assets that do n't pass to a beneficiary by operation of a contract are subject to probate , which is where a will comes in . It is possible to have the proceeds of a life insurance policy be distributed according to the terms of a will by naming the insured 's estate as the policy beneficiary -LRB- e.g. Beneficiary : Estate of the Insured -RRB- . However , doing so is generally avoided because of the disadvantages inherent in the probate process : During probate , a will is subject to being challenged by anyone with standing -LRB- generally , anyone who can prove a relationship to the deceased -RRB- . A beneficiary designation is n't subject to those types of challenges . Assets of the probate estate are subject to the claims of creditors of the estate ; life insurance proceeds paid to the insured 's estate may get depleted to repay debts before the intended heirs receive any benefit . The probate process is a public court proceeding , andcan be lengthy . A life insurance death benefit claim involves only the beneficiary and the insurance company , and claims are generally paid very quickly - often within two weeks .
Life insurance does not usually go through probate . If it is left to a person , charity , or group , it bypasses probate . However , if the beneficiary is the estate , or if all the beneficiaries are deceased , the proceeds of the policy will go to the estate , and thus , go through probate .
Life insurance does not go to probate unless the beneficiary on the policy is the estate . If there are no living beneficiaries at the time of the death of the Insured person , the life insurance can also go to probate . If the policy 's beneficiary is a person or trust , the life insurance proceeds do not need to go through probate in most circumstances .
Life insurance can be taxed in certain circumstances . Here are some of the reasons that it can and can not be taxed . Life insurance can be taxed if you cancel a cash value policy , such as a whole life or universal life where cash value builds . When you surrender or cancel a policy all of the growth of the cash value is taxed as ordinary income . If you apply for a loan to borrow against your cash value and keep it in force , then that money is not taxed . Life insurance death benefits are usually not taxed regardless of whether the policy is cash value or term . Life benefit proceeds are passed directly to the beneficiary tax free and do not go through probate . However , in most cases if the beneficiary is left to the estate and the life proceeds go into probate , then the proceeds can be taxed as part of the estate . Both of these mistakes can be avoided with good planning before it is too late .
Life insurance will bypass probate if there is a living beneficiary or beneficiaries to receive the life insurance proceeds , as stated in the policy . If the death benefit is left to the estate -LRB- or if there are no living beneficiaries on the policy , which also causes it to go to the estate -RRB- , the life insurance proceeds will go through probate .
Yes , you can make the beneficiary of a life insurance policy the estate and the proceeds will go into the estate . You really do n't want to do that . The great benefit of life insurance is being able to leave money to a loved one that can not be taxed and does not have to pass through probate . If your estate is the beneficiary of your life insurance proceeds not only will the money be tied up in probate court for months , but it will be taxed along with the estate taxes . Please seek advice of a professional before making this common error .
Life insurance proceeds can avoid probate . Having a named beneficiary rather than the estate of the insured allows the property to pass by contract directly to heirs without the need for probate . Its effect generally supersedes anything that a will or trust might say . If there is no beneficiary , the proceeds default to the estate which results in probate . It is also a good idea to consider naming at least one contingent -LRB- backup -RRB- beneficiary and have the insurer confirm the identity of all beneficiaries at least every three years . Clients are often surprised to find they have existing policies with beneficiaries who are deceased which means the estate would get the proceeds and be subjected to probate .
In Canada , typically if the beneficiaries of the policy are individuals then the proceeds of the policy do not need to go through probate . If the beneficiary is the estate then the proceeds will have to be probated and subject to claims of creditors . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life insurance proceeds generally do not go into the estate at the time of the insured person 's death . However , some people designate the estate as the beneficiary , in which the death benefit would go through probate . They will also go into the estate by default if all beneficiaries named are deceased . To avoid life insurance proceeds from going to the estate , name a person or organization as beneficiary .
Life insurance proceeds are separate from an estate and are paid directly to the beneficiaries . The will is executed through the courts called probate . A will can not override a life insurance policy since it is separate and outside probate . The exception would be if the beneficiary is the estate , then the will could dictate the proceeds . This is a very costly mistake . Life insurance proceeds are not taxed unless they are left to an estate and they be come taxed along with the estate .
Life insurance that is left to a person as beneficiary does not have to go through probate . A check is sent to the beneficiary shortly after the death claim and certified death certificate are sent to the life insurance insurance company . On the other hand , if the estate is set up as the beneficiary , or if the beneficiaries stated on the policy are not alive at the time of the death of the insured person , the proceeds would go to the estate and then , through probate .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Have Car Insurance ?
Insurance is designed to share a risk that you can not handle yourself . Can you pay the $ 750,000 paid a few months ago to the family of a pedestrian struck in a crossing lane ? Can you afford to buy your vehicle if it is damaged in a collision ? If you or a passenger is hurt in your car by someone else who thinks auto insurance is unnecessary , can you pay the medical bills ? The legal requirement is a minor issue .
That is a great question ! The best answer I can give you is because it 's the right thing to do . First , it 's right because it demonstrates responsibility in protecting yourself , and others on the road ; secondly it shows responsibility in obeying the law , as auto insurance coverage is mandated by law . Responsibility is a good thing , especially if you are going to be driving . Thanks for asking !
First of all in most states it is mandatory and you can lose your license if you do not have insurance . It is also a protection for you against lawsuits . Non of us plan on being in an at fault accident and hurting or killing someone . If someone is hurt or killed they or their family are entitled to compensation . Car insurance can help provide at least some compensation for medical bills and loss of income for the innocent party .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Great Question on classic car insurance . Normally classic car insurance offers limited use on the car or miles so the insurance company has a restriction on the use of the car . You have to have a second car to drive on a daily basis to quality for classic car insurance so that is why the premium is less on that type of insurance .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Depending on your states requirements . In Montana you have to have an insurable interest in the auto . Other cases where you can insure a car that is not in your name is when you have a child living in your home and you have your car and theirs on the policy . There are otherreasons why you would do this example would be your fianc lives with you and you both drive only one car but the car is just your fiancs name the yes you could place this on a policy that you and your fianc are on the policy and even thought you do not own the car you own the policy and they are now the 2nd named insured
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
That is a great question ! The better question though , is why would you want to ? I could maybe , possibly , barely , almostsee why if she were still driving the car ; if she had policies that bundled with yours and kept your rates low , or if she were making the payments . But she is n't going to be legally obligated to you anymore , and if she 's not going to be driving the car , probably is going to stop paying , drop you from her policies , and not care too much if your car gets a new dent or scratch . I 'm not suggesting in any way that your Ex is in any kind of way a bad person , or doing anything wrong . That is just the way it is . It may be better to just let that one go , and let her find a policy that will work best for her . If you 'd like to discuss this privately , please contact me , okay ? Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
While of the `` unearned '' premium should be returned when you cancel your car insurance , it would be important to know why you are cancelling your car insurance.If there are no other cars in your household and you are not considered an insured on another comparable auto insurance policy , you may wish to consider `` Non-owned Auto '' coverage . This type of policy covers you for liability and physical damage while you are operating a car you do not own -LRB- borrowed , rented , etc. -RRB- and may provide uninsured/underinsured coverage to you when you are a pedestrian or riding in someone else 's vehicle . Not owning a car does not mean you no longer have an auto related exposure .
In order to answer your question I have to know what make , model auto are you wanting to quote . How old are you ? Do you have any traffic violations . Are you the principal driver of the car ? Do you drive this car to work each day and how far ? Will the car be driven by other drivers ? related to you ? Will the car be used in your business ? There is a friendly agent sitting in a local office that would love to answer your question . Why not call him or her today ?
Your auto insurance will often extend to a vehicle you rent , depending on the specific circumstances . If the rental is replacing your car because of repair , vs , a car n vacation , the situation may be different . It 's best to determine the state you are in , the company you are with , and why you are renting a car to determine exact coverage . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites .
Boy there are any number of reasons that I can offer to illustrate why our car insurance , or any insurance for that matter , may go up , or down for that matter . Major factors in pricing usually include one 's age , drivng experience , driving history , claims history , etc. . You may pay more for car insurance in certain areas of the country than others based upon population , company experience within those territories etc. . Naturally another major factor is the year , make model and type of car that you drive and insure . Finally , over the years , it has become common and accepted to include one 's credit history among the many factors that a company uses in order to consider and properly price a car insurance policy .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Flexible Life Insurance ?
Flexible Life Insurance is the old moniker for universal life -LRB- UL -RRB- . The adjective flexible was applied to UL because you could alter the premium and the death benefit within the parameters of the product line . That flexible was a consumer draw in light of the static and unalterable whole life insurance policy .
Usually this refers to a Universal Life Policy . A Universal Life policy is flexible in that you can vary your premium payments and death benefit . It is difficult to explain completely in this format , but essential with a UL you can skip payments -LRB- provided there is cash value in the policy -RRB- , you can put more in or put less into the policy . Some people with a UL will put a portion of their Tax Refund into their policy each year , for example . This helps the cash value of the policy grow at a tax favored competitive rate of interest . You can also decrease your death benefit if you do not need as much insurance or if your health is good you can increase the death benefit .
Flexible premium life insurance comes in many flavors . It is a type of permanent life insurance , a variation of what has long been called `` whole life '' because the policy remains in effect until you die as long as you pay premiums , or there is enough cash reserve to continue the planned premiums .
Its really not a question of what is better . Its a question of knowing how to use the flexibility built into the product . Universal life insurance can accommodate flexible premium payments . At the same time , it makes available premium guarantees . If you overuse the flexibility of the product , you can lose the guarantees . A certain payment commitment must be made to the company if you want them to guarantee the coverage for a specified amount of time . If you overfund , then underfund , then stop paying , then start paying again , odds are you wont get the guarantee you want for the time you want . But if you are smart about it , you can have your cake and eat it too . You can take advantage of the flexibility of the product to come up with a creative funding strategy . So the flexibility is really best utilized in the design stage . Then , when you come up with a payment schedule that is suitable , you make your payment commitment . You stick with the program . What kind of payment strategies could you employee with this product ? The options are many . You could fund the policy with a single premium . Make a payment in year one , and then not make any at all . But you still get a lifetime guarantee . You could go to 10-year pay , or a 20-year pay , or 30 years pay scenario . Pay the premium for that period only , but still get a lifetime guarantee . These strategies allow you to on the one hand , not pay for your life insurance for the rest of your life . At the same time , they still give you the lifetime guaranteed coverage you want . Of course , you need to consult with your broker and the company to calculate the correct amounts needed to limit your payments but also get the guarantee . Then again , you could just go the route of continuously paying a premium on a yearly basis . You would have to keep paying , but the premium here would be much cheaper than the first two scenarios . So what is your priority ? Would it be the lowest annual outlay , or paying the premium for the shortest duration ? The flexibility of universal life gives you additional interesting options . You could structure the coverage for a defined amount of years . It could be 10 years , 20 years , or 30 years . The premium and the death benefit could be guaranteed for that amount of time . After that , you lose the guarantee . Why would somebody do that ? Why wouldnt they just buy term insurance ? Well , in many cases underwriting concessions are made for permanent insurance that you dont get with term insurance . The price for universal life could actually be lower than term insurance . As a matter of fact , sometimes carriers will offer only universal life insurance and not term insurance . The flexibility of this product can really enable you to make your life insurance work to your best advantage . You just have to know how to use it .
It depends on the insurer as to what Adjustable Life is . There were a couple of midwestern companies who had products with that moniker which were fixed premium adjustable life insurance products . Universal Life one of the dominant forms of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life which is the official name of the product . So , it may be that you are asking about Universal Life . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
There are two basic types of life insurance : term and permanent . Term is for temporary needs and covers a specific length of time - typically up to 30 years . Permanent or cash value life insurance is designed to last for a lifetime and , provided the required premiums are paid , can not be outlived . Permanent policies comes in different forms such as whole life or universal life . Whole life features fixed premiums that must be paid until maturity , often age 100 . Universal Life is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life - this is the official name of this type of product . It describes in a simple way how the product works . Premiums are flexible because that can be adjusted upward or downward . You can also skip premiums . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly.Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policyowners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Permanent policies have variations with features and flexibility for a wide range of planning situations . Consult with a life insurance professional to design the best plan to meet your specific needs .
Universal Life is a form of permanent life insurance -LRB- cash value life insurance -RRB- . It is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life . This is the official name of this type of product . The key words are `` flexible '' and `` adjustable '' . Premiums are flexible because they can be adjusted upward or downward , subject to an initial minimum premium . You can also skip premiums in future years . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Where whole life is a `` black box '' product , universal life is `` unbundled '' and transparent in how it operates internally . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policy-owners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate . There are variations on the basic structure such as guaranteed UL or the popular index UL but , aside from how secondary guarantees are calculated or interest is credited , the basic mechanics are the same .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
That is a great question ! The deal is that it really boils down to how well you manage your money , in my opinion . The sales pitch for a flexible premium policy is that you have the ability to be `` flexible '' with your payments - you might pay a little more than the premium , skip a payment entirely , or overpay , as you see fit . If you are the type of person that is very closely watching your expenditures , and keeps a sharp eye on your investments , then this policy type can be potentially helpful in the convenience it offers . But ... If you are like the overwhelming majority of Americans -LRB- 77 % - an unbelievable 77 % !! -RRB- that live paycheck to paycheck , part of the 66 % without adequate -LRB- or any -RRB- savings , or the 35 % with a bill currently in collections , this may not be a good thing . The Bible tells us that while `` All things are permissible , not all things are good . '' That is solid wisdom , in this case . The temptation here is to believe that the `` flexibility '' offered here provides you with more wiggle room in payments . While that is true to some degree , the truth is that there is a bottom line cost that has to be regularly covered or the policy goes under and lapses . Once it does , everything that you 've paid into it goes under also . Sadly , what happens to those who have problems with cash flow and/or money management is that they make payments that cover those costs for a while , but slowly start underpaying or skipping payments , and the result is that the minimum premium payment goes up , it becomes unaffordable , more payments are underpaid or missed , and the policy goes down like the Titanic , taking all your money with it . So it is generally my opinion and recommendation that having a single , set premium payment policy is generally a safer bet . If the payment is budgeted for , and prioritized , there is far less chance of the policy falling behind and lapsing . The offer of flexible payments is definitely tantalizing , but then again , most of the things that are bad for us generally are ... Bottom line ? If you are good with your money and keep an eye on your financial matters , there are times when having that flexibility can be helpful . If you feel that money management may be an area of opportunity for you , perhaps the stability of the fixed premium policy would be a safer choice . I hope that helps , if you have any questions , please do not hesitate to inbox me , okay ? Thank you very much for asking !
Flexible premium adjustable life is the more antiquated title of universal life . Today , there are four different universal life polices. : current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . These three is feature the flexibility or adjust-ability of premiums and death benefit amounts . Guaranteed universal life , in general terms , does not have this flexible feature based on it 's secondary guarantees .
What is flexible adjustible life ? Another name for universal life . Have n't really heard it in a while but I am sure some companies use that name for universal life , to be different . A universal life policy is flexible as you can choose to pay your premium or not . It is adjustible because you can lower the face amount , change the contribution levels and a few other things . This makes for a really flexible product , which actually has meant more troubles for insured than good old fashion pay your premium each month policies , which chug along .
Universal life is more flexible than a whole life policy . flexible premiums , non forfeiture options , flexible benefit amounts , builds cash value like whole life may also be variable or not like whole life . Universal life policies are usually issued using the same requirements as a whole life policy . MIB clearing , usually physical by insurings choice
I 'm guessing you asked the question the way you did because you heard someone say that flexible premium insurance is better than fixed premium . Here 's an experience a client of mine had with a `` Flexible Premium Life Insurance '' . He was told that it was a permanent life insurance that would build cash value and he could have flexibility in how much premium he would pay . He had the policy for 20 years and it had indeed grown some cash value , but while he never paid less than the original stated premium the cash value had begun declining in recent years and was down to nearly nothing . Had he kept the policy , in order to keep it in force he would have to increase the premium every year from now on . So my answer to your question is : Flexible premium policies are NOT better than fixed premium policies ! -LRB- And `` buy term and invest the rest '' is another piece of advise I strongly disagree with . -RRB-
Flexible Life Insurance is the old moniker for universal life -LRB- UL -RRB- . The adjective flexible was applied to UL because you could alter the premium and the death benefit within the parameters of the product line . That flexible was a consumer draw in light of the static and unalterable whole life insurance policy .
Whole Life has set premiums that never go up , guaranteed cash values , and will be around when you need it as long as you pay the premiums . It also has what is called non-forfeiture values . If you stop making payments and the policy has cash value you can : 1 . Let the policy go on extended term which will provide the full face amount for a period until the cash value runs out . 2 . Take a reduced paid up policy for whatever the cash value will buy . 3 . Cash the policy in . Universal Life has Flexible Premiums , you can change the amount you put into the plan . Flexible Death Benefit , you can change the death benefit , reducing it or if your health is good increase the benefit without having to purchase a new policy . Universal Life has a guaranteed interest rate , not guaranteed cash value . Since the premiums are flexible the danger is in under funding the policy which will make the policy lapse , even if you are making premium payments . Universal Life is basically term insurance with a cash value side fund combined into one package . If there is not enough cash in the policy side fund to pay for the term insurance the policy lapses . It is important to make sure you are properly funding the Universal Life policy by paying at least the Target Premium . Each year you will receive an annual statement showing the cost of the term insurance and the amount of cash in the policy . Have your agent review this with you at least every two years to make sure it is performing as planned . As you can see , while the Universal Life has some attractive features , Whole Life is a safer more stable product .
Whole life insurance has a specified premium that never goes up , a specified death benefit that will not expire unless the policy lapses or you die or surrender the policy , and guaranteed cash value build up . Universal life has flexible premiums , you can vary the amount you put into the plan . It has a flexible death benefit , you can decrease the amount of insurance or increase the amount of insurance without having to take out a new policy . Because the premiums are flexible there is no guaranteed cash value . Most will have a guaranteed interest rate on any cash value . The danger with a Universal Life is under funding the contract . Because you are not locked into a set premium and there is an interest component that is not guaranteed , if the insured fails to put enough in the contract and the cost of insurance becomes greater than the cash value the policy will expire . It is important to make sure you properly fund your Universal life . Whole life has better guarantees than Universal life and less risk .
The greatest strength of universal life , its flexibility , also gives rise to its potential for disappointment if the policy was not set up properly or is not managed for the inevitable changes in life . Universal life took off in popularity in the early 1980s because , unlike whole life , it featured flexible premiums , adjustable death benefits , unbundled components which clearly disclosed policy charges and credits and dynamic interest crediting which reflected competitive interest rates . The universal life product type remains popular to this day but with flexibility comes risks of planning to pay premiums when interest rates are high which are too low when interest rates fall , as is the case today . Skipping premiums also presents a risk that the cash value may not remain high enough later to maintain the policy . Over time , all policies must be managed . We recommend a policy review by your life insurance professional at least every three years or sooner to ensure the policy is properly maintained and to adapt where necessary to changes that occur .
Universal Life is also known as Flexible Premium Adjustable Life - this is the official name of this type of product . It describes in a simple way how the product works . Premiums are flexible because that can be adjusted upward or downward . You can also skip premiums . You also have a choice of level or increasing death benefit which describes the adjustable nature of the product . Universal life builds cash value that can grow based on a stated fixed interest rate , which may vary over time , but which will never be less than a guaranteed minimum interest rate . Policy costs for administrative expenses and cost of insurance are deducted from the cash value monthly . Universal life is best suited to satisfy the longer-term needs of policyowners who want premium flexibility and cash value accumulations that reflect current fixed interest rate returns , with a guaranteed minimum interest rate .
A whole life insurance policy is an extremely flexible product that can meet many needs in retirement . The most obvious need is death . It is obvious that retirement always ends in death . Death is not inexpensive . The proceeds of a whole life insurance policy can pay off some or all of those expenses . After a certain age term policies can not be written at any price . I recently had a client who forgot that there was a life policy on her husband . She was paying his funeral expenses on an installment plan . I discovered the policy and brought it to her attention . She was delighted . Another use of a whole life policy is to transfer property to heirs . Often a person will want to leave money to children , grandchildren or a favorite charity . They will then try to conserve their retirement assets so that money will be available when the die . Unfortunately they often rob themselves of lifes simple pleasures in their drive to provide that inheritance . A life insurance policy can do that at the beginning of retirement leaving the person the balance of assets to spend as they wish . Some people have estates that are subject to estate tax . The problem with estate tax is that if there isnt cash to pay the taxes , assets are often sold at below market value to pay the tax . Having cash can make the difference of keeping the family business going , maintaining the family farm or closing them up for taxes . Since that can happen at any time , a whole life policy is particularly flexible in that regard . Whole life insurance is often used when a person wants to leave a specific valuable asset to one child but wants to treat all the children in the same manner . The heirs that are not going to get that valuable asset could receive equivalent proceeds from a whole life policy and everyone would be happy . A whole life policy is often used to purchase the interest of another party in a business . In this case the surviving partners dont particularly want to share everything with a widow who may not be acquainted with the business . A whole life policy can provide the cash to take care of that situation by giving the survivors the funds they need to purchase the widows interests . Sometimes whole life insurance is used to fund day to day living expenses in retirement . I just finished a comparison that showed that a whole life policy performed as well as a fixed annuity in accumulating money for retirement and that it did that with the promise to pay the full benefit should the person die before retiring . The whole life policy has non-forfeiture provisions which can pay a lifetime stream of income if desired or the policy would also give the person the flexibility to use the policy in other ways depending upon future , unforeseen events . This may sound strange but I often get requests for whole life insurance from older individuals . They seem to appreciate the value of lasting protection at a fixed price .
How much Variable Universal Life costs you depends on a number of factors , some are flexible , some are not . Universal life is a complex product that unbundles the components of a whole life policy to provide you with more control and flexibility . The basic building blocks are cost of insurance , expense charges and investment earnings . There are a number of death benefit options available which affect the cost of insurance . For example you can have a level death benefit or level insurance plus cash value . The cost of insurance can be annually increasing for life , annual increasing then paid up at 85 , level and a number of other options that vary by company . The expense portion of the premium is stated in the policy . Some expenses are fixed and guaranteed others are variable so you would need to refer to the policy for details . In Canada , the earnings inside a universal life policy are always expressed as interest . Some policies have 400 + investment options that , in addition to Guaranteed Interest , can mirror the performance -LRB- positive or negative -RRB- of a variety of mutual funds in a tax preferred environment . I say mirror , because you do not actually own units in the particular mutual fund , just the performance . In Canada , the total maximum premium to keep the policy exempt for accrual taxation is set by the government . This provides you with flexibility , it is important that you understand that if the the policy is underfunded it could go out of force . The policy needs to be managed . So how much does Variable Universal Life Cost ? It depends . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further question , or feel tat I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Where Do I Withdraw My 401K ?
You withdraw monies from your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- through the administer of your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan you have through your company . Contact your HR department and request paperwork to either take a loan , withdraw and or close out your account . Be aware that if you do withdraw monies or close your account , you will have to pay the taxes for this year .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
Most people would want to wait until they are at least 591/2 years old to withdraw money from their 401k because that is the age when penalty free withdrawals can be taken . You can take withdrawals earlier , but there will be a 10 % penalty for early withdrawal . There are exceptions to the 591/2 age requirement : You become totally and permanently disabled . You terminate employment through permanent layoff , termination , quitting or taking early retirement in the year you turn 55 , or later . Pay for medical care up to the amount allowable as a medical expense deduction in the same year as the medical expense was incurred . Your withdrawal is a response to a qualified domestic relations order . You are required to begin 401k withdrawals by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn 701/2 . Regardless of when you take your withdrawal from your 401k , the amount you take out will be taxed as ordinary income for that tax year . You should always seek out a qualified financial professional for help in these situations prior to taking action .
That is a great question ! When you make contributions to your Roth IRA , those contributions are made after you are taxed on them . When you make contributions to your companies 401k , for example , those contributions are subtracted from your income before the remainder of the income is taxed . Since Uncle Sam did n't get his slice of tax on your 401k money , he takes it when you make your withdrawals . In your Roth 's case , you 've already paid him , so your Roth withdrawals are not taxed . So your contributions , -LRB- up to $ 5500 , $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- are made after tax -LRB- and can not be deducted on your income tax forms -RRB- , and your withdrawals tax free , as long as they meet the 5 year , or 591/2 year old rule . If you withdraw more than what you 've paid in before that time , the gains are taxable , so be careful . I hope that clears it up for you , if not , please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! I 'd need to know a little more information about why you want to withdraw or close it out , before I 'd feel comfortable telling you to do it . There are very large penalties for early withdrawals from your 401k , and if you are counting on a certain amount , unless you are in your 60 's , please count on that amount being reduced by about a third , after taxes and penalties . 401k money looks good , but taking it out for something other than its intended use is costly . If you would like to proceed anyway , contact your plan administrator , and they will give you the forms to fill out . I can not say strongly enough to speak with an advisor before doing this , for any reason other than starting your retirement income . Thank you for asking !
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
401K 's are funded with pretax dollars , which means that the money is taken out of your paycheck before taxes are deducted . The benefit is that it lowers your taxable income for the year but eventually when you retire you will have to pay taxes on that money . Also if you make withdrawals before you reach the age of 591/2 , typically you will have to pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty on top of any taxes that are due . 401K are good but there are other retirement options .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
That is a really good question ! And trust me , you 're not the only one asking it ... There are really very few certainties in life , but we all seek to find as many as possible . Knowing that we have a safely protected retirement certainly ranks up near the top . While we can not guarantee that our retirement fund will last , there are some things that you can do to help ensure it : 1 . -RRB- Have a clear picture of what retirement means to you - does it mean travelling and dining out often ? If so , your fund will need to be large enough to accommodate that . If it looks more like fishing and working part time , then perhaps your fund can be a little more modest , and still be fine . But if you do not know , `` People without vision perish , '' as the Proverb goes . 2 . -RRB- Pay close attention to how your 401k is performing . If you do n't know what it is doing , you are right to worry . While I do not recommend knee jerk reactions to losses , trends are worth paying attention to , especially if they are negative , precipitous , and lengthy . 3 . -RRB- Know your spending habits . Have a very good grip on your budget process , and where you can squeeze out a little more to invest . Having good habits and keeping debt low entering retirement helps with the life of your investment also . 4 . -RRB- Do not put all of your eggs in one basket , or as you more commonly hear , diversify . Start a Roth IRA to balance out your taxable 401k ; Purchase an annuity or two to ensure a steady income stream that will not run out . Purchase some property that you can earn an income from during retirement ; invest in bonds and low maintenance mutual funds . 5 . -RRB- Plan for the inevitable medical expenses that come with age . The Law allows for a dedicated retirement account used exclusively for health care to be non-taxable , if health issues are likely , start one . Look at a life insurance policy that includes living benefit provisions , or look into long term care protection . If your company offers an HSA , enroll , and start paying into it . 6 . -RRB- Save , save , save . Find high yield savings accounts , and be certain to have an emergency account . Having one allows you to be able to not have to make withdrawals from your retirement funds , or acquire more debt . Having one allows you to be able to make investments that otherwise would only be dreams . The best way to alleviate worry is to trust ; Faith in the One who provides for us , and being a good steward of what we 're given allows us to sleep at night . Hopefully there are ideas here that will help you . Please feel free to contact me if you would like a more personal analysis of where you sit . A great question , and one I 'm glad that you asked . Thanks !
That is a great question ! There are some good reasons for borrowing from your 401k , and some bad ones . The good reasons are that they are typically fairly easy to get , and often at much lower interest rates than a commercial lender would give . And depending upon the structure of your 401k , in some cases , the interest that you pay is to yourself , so there is less loss on the loan itself . The bad reasons are worth considering . The worst is what happens if you are let go , or leave the job before the loan is paid off . In many cases the loan has to be repaid within a short period of time , may have serious tax consequences , and that 's not even considering what the withdrawal of the funds may do to the earnings power of your 401k if it 's not structured correctly . The best thing to do is speak with your plan administrator , or HR person , and find out the details of taking out a loan and what the terms are . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
That is a terrific question ! Yes , you absolutely can , and should ! If you can afford to fund both accounts , by all means do so . The tax free growth advantage of the Roth , and the freedom to continue letting it grow when you turn 701/2 make it a perfect compliment to the taxed withdrawals of your 401k account . The balance of the two are a very good investment plan for your retirement . You should be aware that the IRS caps the amount of yearly contributions in your Roth at $ 5500 a year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are over 50 years old -RRB- . You can put $ 18,000 into your 401k , in 2015 , and an additional $ 6,000 if over the age of 50 . If you can afford to max these out , do it ! Especially the 401k if your company matches a percentage of the contributions that you are making . What a great question ! If you need more detail , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
How is a Roth better than a 401k ? Well it 's not a matter of better , it 's a matter of different . Both a Roth and 401k give you tax deferred savings , they just differ on when taxes are applied . A 401k allows contributions to go in pre-tax and grow tax deferred . When those funds are withdrawn they are income and subject to taxes in what ever bracket you 're in . A Roth does the opposite , you pay taxes on your contribution and it grows tax deferred , then distributions from your Roth are done without any tax implication . So the question of one over the other is do you think taxes will be higher or lower when you begin to withdraw funds ?
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Looks like David has covered the question pretty thoroughly so I 'll just give the short answer . When you withdraw from your 401K early - that is before reaching age 55 , you will be taxed on the entire amount . Then you will be penalized ten percent of the pre taxed amount . On top of that you may also have a percentage withheld for income tax for the year of withdrawal .
Because your Roth 401k contributions were from after-tax dollars , you can withdraw your contributions to the account without facing penalties or taxes . Withdrawals beyond the level of your contributions , can result in a penalty and taxes if you are under 591/2 and have not had the account for a minimum of 5 years . There are some hardship exceptions to the age rule .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
The appropriate answer here is '' anywhere you want to invest your 401k assets . '' I mean who are you ? What are your goals ? What have you been investing your 401k in ? How can any adviser tell you where to invest after retirement without knowing you ? Sorry , but I think this is a dumb question . Usually , people roll 401k assets over into an IRA . Some employers allow you to stay put and keep your current investments .
This is a tough question . How old are you ? What is your health ? And why are you taking the money out ? If you are older than 591/2 , you can request a distribution form from your plan sponsor or employer . The form will ask whether you want to take a single distribution or a series of systematic payments . If it is not going into a Rollover IRA , the sponsor usually withholds the taxes on your behalf and you would get the net amount paid to you either in a check or an EFT . If you are YOUNGER than 591/2 , there is a 10 % excise tax that is charged -LRB- premature withdrawal -RRB- by the IRS . So if you can , try and avoid withdrawing funds prior to your retirement and do a LOAN instead . That way you are paying yourself the interest on the loaned portion of the 401K funds , and not a bank . Depending on your plan , you may also be able to take out what they call `` in service '' distributions . These allow you to transfer your funds into IRA accounts and diversify your investments for retirement . And thanks to a recent IRS change , you can even move funds from your Retirement and create a guaranteed income stream -LRB- provided by the carrier that you purchase the product from -RRB- through a Deferred Income Annuity . Think of this like buying a defined benefit with your retirement assets that you can never outlive . I hope that this answers your question .
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 591/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Does HMO Health Insurance Cover ?
HMO 's cover the same medical services that traditional major medical insurance plans , either group or individual cover . The essential difference is in the provider network used to deliver these benefits and how the subscriber 's access to their benefits is guided by this approach . HMO stands for Health Maintenance Organization and while there are variations on the theme , in its purest form an HMO has an exclusive network of contracted providers that must be used by subscribers to the HMO in order to receive covered services . In this context an HMO would not pay for services a member receives from a non-HMO provider . Also , HMO 's often use a `` gatekeeper '' approach that requires a referral from a Primary Care Physician before the member can receive care from a specialist or other HMO provider for non-emergency services . Theoretically the HMO concept assures that your Primary Care Physician is overseeing the member 's complete range of health care services and treatment , makes sure that care is being delivered in the most appropriate and cost effective setting and manner , and maximizes the overall efficiency of the delivery of health care to its members . In practical terms the HMO concept has generally fared best in higher population density areas that have an extensive and competitive medical infrastructure in place . One of the main reasons for this is that the HMO providers can actually be employees of the HMO or have negotiated deep discounts for their services with the HMO in exchange for a high volume of patient traffic . Accomplishing this in a metropolitan area like Los Angeles is far easier than in a rural area where there may be not be many competing providers and hospitals and these providersare already serving virtually all of the area 's population . Also , the more restrictive and controlling nature of the HMO concept has not always been welcomed by the American consumer who has been accustomed to making their own choices when it comes to selecting their doctors , hospitals and pharmacies and having a high degree of freedom in when and where they access the health care system . While HMOs can deliver excellent benefits and services at attractive rates , the potential consumer should also consider the trade offs involved in achieving these ends . If the consumer finds the HMO network to be sufficient for their perceived needs and understands therules of being an HMO member it can be a very positive environment in which to receive one 's health care . Going into an HMO without understanding and accepting these factors can lead to a very unsatisfactory and perhaps costly experience .
HMO 's cover the same medical services that traditional major medical insurance plans , either group or individual cover . The essential difference is in the provider network used to deliver these benefits and how the subscriber 's access to their benefits is guided by this approach . HMO stands for Health Maintenance Organization and while there are variations on the theme , in its purest form an HMO has an exclusive network of contracted providers that must be used by subscribers to the HMO in order to receive covered services . In this context an HMO would not pay for services a member receives from a non-HMO provider . Also , HMO 's often use a `` gatekeeper '' approach that requires a referral from a Primary Care Physician before the member can receive care from a specialist or other HMO provider for non-emergency services . Theoretically the HMO concept assures that your Primary Care Physician is overseeing the member 's complete range of health care services and treatment , makes sure that care is being delivered in the most appropriate and cost effective setting and manner , and maximizes the overall efficiency of the delivery of health care to its members . In practical terms the HMO concept has generally fared best in higher population density areas that have an extensive and competitive medical infrastructure in place . One of the main reasons for this is that the HMO providers can actually be employees of the HMO or have negotiated deep discounts for their services with the HMO in exchange for a high volume of patient traffic . Accomplishing this in a metropolitan area like Los Angeles is far easier than in a rural area where there may be not be many competing providers and hospitals and these providersare already serving virtually all of the area 's population . Also , the more restrictive and controlling nature of the HMO concept has not always been welcomed by the American consumer who has been accustomed to making their own choices when it comes to selecting their doctors , hospitals and pharmacies and having a high degree of freedom in when and where they access the health care system . While HMOs can deliver excellent benefits and services at attractive rates , the potential consumer should also consider the trade offs involved in achieving these ends . If the consumer finds the HMO network to be sufficient for their perceived needs and understands therules of being an HMO member it can be a very positive environment in which to receive one 's health care . Going into an HMO without understanding and accepting these factors can lead to a very unsatisfactory and perhaps costly experience .
This is really a question of what you prefer . An HMO describes a plan that pays it 's doctors and other providers a flat fee per patient . You must choose a primary care physician and they are responsible for your care . They usually do n't get to bill for their services , they have to make do with what they get . They will be your first call or visit and will manage your referrals and other care . They are usually part of a hospitals system and your inpatient care will be within that hospital system . You have less control over the providers you utilize than with a PPO . A PPO is n't really a health insurance plan , it 's a network of physicians , hospitals and other providers . Many health insurance companies may utilize a PPO to control their costs . This is a fee for service arrangement where the provider bills the company for your care and you must use the hospitals in the network to get your highest benefit level . You can usually chose your doctors and hospitals and you have more control than with an HMO . The health insurance companies save money by using a PPO because the providers have to agree to get paid on the PPO 's fee schedule to gain access to the patients . Historically , and HMO is less expensive than a plan using a PPO . This is because the HMO has more control over your care and they also have more control over a providers compensation . This is really a question of preference . If you 're OK with the HMO dictating where you go and who you see for your care , this would be a great option for you and you 'll probably save some money . However , If you 'd like to be the one to choose who you see for your care , you 'd probably be more comfortable with a PPO arrangement . Just realize that you 'll probably have to pay a little more for that freedom .
HMO is a health maintenance organization . HMO 's come in different flavors but most share similar structures . With most HMO 's you have a PCP -LRB- primary care provider -RRB- that directs all your care , including referrals to other HMO network providers . In rare situations they will make a referral to a non-network provider . Some folks do n't like the `` tight rein '' HMO 's use to direct your care . In many cases HMO 's have a higher standard of care -LRB- vs PPO or POS -RRB- and better outcomes .
It depends a lot on what state you are in . Humana does have HMO & PPO Medicare Advantage plans . However , people often confuse what they know about health insurance prior to turning 65 with health insurance after they turn 65 . There are big differences . It is no longer about HMO or PPO . All Medicare Advantage , HMO & PPO are basically in the same category which is a Medicare Advantage plan . It really becomes a question of do you want a Medicare Advantage plan or a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- ? One of the great features of a Medicare Supplement plan is there is `` no network '' so you can go to any doctor or hospital in any state you want . If they take Medicare they will take the Medicare Supplement regardless of carrier .
HMO is short for Health Maintenance Organization . Essentially , an HMO is a network of providers -LRB- doctors , specialist , hospitals , faculties -RRB- who have contracted with an insurance company to submit claims for visits and procedures given to the insurers membership . Typically an HMO will only pay for visits to doctors in their network and does not allow for services provided by doctors not contracted with them . As a member of an HMO , your care is driven by a Primary Care Physician who usually acts as the first source of diagnosis . The are often called the `` gatekeeper '' because access to specialists services or high end procedures need to go through the PCP . The PCP will determine the medical necessity of the specialist or procedure and make a referral .
Medicare Advantage plans come in different flavors including the HMO . In evaluating which plan is best for you , consider the following . Advantage HMO plans have limited networks . If your current doctor is not in the network you will need to switch doctors if you want your treatment covered . HMO plans generally offer in network coverage only . If you receive treatment outside the network you are responsible for 100 % of the charges . Exceptions apply for emergency medical situations . Your out of pocket limit -LRB- usually $ 3000 - $ 6000 -RRB- does not include out of network expenses . If you want more flexibility and would rather not deal with out of network penalties , you may want to consider a Medicare supplement plan . Original Medicare is accepted nationwide , there are no networks , and the supplement plan picks up approved Medicare charges that are not paid due to deductibles and coinsurance . For many , Medigap plan N or Hi F is a good alternative to a Medicare Advantage HMO plan .
Depending on the utilization rate at which a individual , and their family requires medical treatments/services will serve as a deciding factor in what type of health plan will be most affordable . An HMO is the least expensive for those who will be requiring a fair amount of medical treatments , although an HMO is also the most limiting form of health insurance . If one is looking to purchase coverage to satisfy the individual mandate included in the ACA and in general the medical services that they and or their family require is generally minimal then they may want to look into a HDHP/HSA . A high deductible health plan coupled with a health savings account will reward the health care consumer who utilizes preventive treatments , does not generally require many medical treatments especially in the first couple years as the value of the health savings account is growing with compound interest .
They reimburse by the Medicare fee schedules and any negotiated arrangements they may have entered into with the HMO . There are experiments going on around the nation where different payment methodologies are being tested out to try and find that perfect balance of quality care and affordability . So , it 's never really been possible to give one answer to your question and in today 's environment that is doubly true . As a general rule , HMO 's were designed originally around a per member per month payment model though this approach has also gone through many variations over the years . In a very real sense you can say that Medicare Advantage plans are HMO 's or have more HMO like features than conventional Medicare does .
Which is best an HMO or PPO ? Actually as far as health care goes , both are very similar . Both offer the benefits laid out by law of your state , or currently what the Federal Government requires . The difference comes down to how they are used for services . A Health Maintenance Organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- uses what is commonly called a gatekeeper system . A gatekeeper is a primary care doctor who the insured works with first and referrals are generated by this primary care doctor . If you use an HMO system you will direct your care through this gatekeeper . A Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- is a network of doctors and specialists who have contracted with a medical plan to provide services to members of that plan . A PPO offers SELF DIRECTED choices for the insured . The insured decides whom they wish to see . If they want to see a specialist , they call the specialist and set up the appointment themselves . Which is better ? Depends entirely on who is using their plans and what they want from a plan .
Although this seems like a simple question there are a lot of variables : Where does the 20 year old live ? How does he/she use health care ? What type of health insurance , HMO or PPO ? What metal tier ? Bronze , Gold , Silver or Platinum The best way to answer your question is to suggest that you talk to a licensed and certified health insurance agent . The agent will ask you a number of questions and obtain quotes from various health insurance carriers . The simple answer is health insurance should cost between $ 200 and $ 350 a month .
A Medicare Advantage HMO plan is similar to major medical HMO plans . With a Medicare Advantage HMO you are required to use par doctors , hospitals and other medical providers in the HMO network . If you use non-par providers , in most cases , you have no coverage . Exceptions are made for par provider referrals to non-par providers and for true medical emergency 's .
It ultimately comes down to what 's right for you . HMOs -LRB- Health Maintenance Organizations -RRB- and PPOs -LRB- Preferred Provider Organizations -RRB- each have their benefits and everyone has their own preferences and coverage benefit desires and premium tolerance . Cost is a big factor for just about everyone so it 's important to look at what each type offers and what 's available in your area . With an HMO plan , you designate a doctor to be your primary care physician -LRB- PCP -RRB- . All of your health care services are coordinated through your PCP . That means that you need a referral before you can see a specialist or other health care provider -LRB- except in an emergency -RRB- . The doctors you visit must be in network - out-of-network doctors typically are n't covered . PPO plans offer more flexibility . You 're not required to designate a PCP and you can go see a specialist without a referral - inside or outside of your network.Staying inside your network means smaller copays and full coverage . If you see a physician outside of your network , you may have a higher out-of-pocket share , and not all services may be covered . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
This truly depends on your zipcode as well . Medicare Advantage plans include Hmo , Hmo-Pos , PPO and PFFS plans . Hmo-pos plans work like a ppo in the sense that you have in and out of network benefits -LRB- out of network benefit co pays are normally a little higher -RRB- . Here in Chicago we have many awesome Hmo-Pos plans that not only allow in and out of network benefits but also can include part D , Dental , Vision and other benefits .
This is really a matter of personal preference . While the lower cost associated with HMO plans can certainly be appealing , anyone with an HMO only has coverage when they are using a medical provider in their network . If having your choice of doctor is important to you , and your chosen physician does not work with an HMO , or if you travel extensively and may need coverage away from your home area , then you will more than likely find the additional cost of a PPO to be very worthwhile .
If a group health plan , health insurance company , or health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- provides maternity benefits , it may not restrict benefits for a hospital stay in connection with childbirth to less than 48 hours following a vaginal delivery or 96 hours following a delivery by cesarean section.You can not be required to obtain preauthorization from your plan in order for your 48-hour or 96-hour stay to be covered . -LRB- However , certain requirements that you give notice to the plan of the pregnancy or the childbirth may apply . -RRB- The law allows you and your baby to be released earlier than these time periods only if the attending provider decides , after consulting with you , that you or your baby can be discharged earlier.In any case , the attending provider can not receive incentives or disincentives to discharge you or your child earlier than 48 hours -LRB- or 96 hours -RRB- . If your state has a law that provides similar hospital stay protections and your plan offers coverage through an insurance policy or HMO , then you may be protected under state law rather than under the Newborns and Mothers Health Protection Act . Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
HMO stands for Health Maitence Organization . It is the most basic form of managed care that one can get . It is characterized by having a primary care phycisian PCP who is entrusted to effectively implement `` utilization management '' processes -LRB- cost containment procedures to effectivly deliver effective medical care -RRB- . One who has a HMO policy is generally called a member or subscriber , and must recieve a referal from their PCP before they seek specialist treatment . HMO 's also utilize `` networks '' that limit costs but can also limit ones choices when it comes to what Dr they can see .
The most common types of health insurance are HMO 's -LRB- Health Maintenance Organizations -RRB- and PPO 's -LRB- Preferred Provider Networks -RRB- . With HMO 's , you have a primary doctor who refers you to specialists . Also , you must receive your care within the network except in emergencies . With PPO 's , you can go directly to specialists . You can go outside of your network and still receive a benefit , but you receive more benefit if you stay within the network . There are also EPO 's -LRB- Exclusive Provider Networks -RRB- , which are basically like an HMO , except you can go directly to a specialist without a referral .
Health insurance can trace its roots back to the 1920 's in the US . The first health insurance was introduced inTexas to offset the costs of hospital stays . Blue Cross was founded specifically for this purpose . Several years later , Blue Shield was added to help offset doctor 's charges . As technological advances in the medical field particularly after WWII , costs rose rapidly . The idea of managed care was advanced with the purpose that if people would regularly schedule appointments to doctors , they could determine high risks much faster and avoid large hospital costs . In the 1970 's , the HMO -LRB- Health Maintenance Org -RRB- gained favor and under President Nixon a bill was passed that would require employers with greater than 25 employees to offer coverage through an HMO . By the early 1990 's , the demand for the flexibility of a traditional plans in addition to the cost saving of the HMO plans , brought us the PPO and the POS . Doctor Office Visit copays and prescription drug copays became the norm . The number of laws governing healthcare and what policies were required to pay increased nearly 1000 % . Technological advances were happening at a `` break-neck '' pace . With each law requiring more health issues to be covered and the advances in technology , ultimatelycaused premiums to increase dramatically . In 1993 , in TN , a $ 1000 deductible for a 35 year old male was $ 41 per month . How things have changed ! The government 's answer was to fix the financing mechanism , concluding that they could control costs by forcing the financing -LRB- aka insurance companies -RRB- to follow strict regulations . Sounds great except : - insurance companies were required to minimize the amounts they paid doctors , hospitals , etc -LRB- providers -RRB- ; while providers were having to serve twice as many patients for the same money and go into $ 100k plus in debt just to get through med school . Can you say train wreck?Which brings us to where we are today ! That maybe a bit more than you asked in questioning the original purpose of health insurance , which in simple terms , was set up to exchange premium for the possibility of an expensive hospital stay in the future .
In our opinion , the Best Health Insurance is the Affordable Health Insurance with the largest operating network in your geographic area and having services in any region you wish to visit.If you desire an HMO or a PPO , the same principal applies , however , if you have an HMO it is even more crucial that there is an option for Out of Network Emergency Care since the HMO clients seem to suffer more when they need medical attention out of their network . Presently , Anthem has the largest network of Doctors and Facilities ; we have provided the following link to obtain a quote , make a selection and purchase your well deserved coverage should you so choose ! WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Irrevocable Life Insurance ?
Life insurance is not usually referred to as irrevocable but there is such a thing as an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- that you may be referring to . This is a trust that owns one or more life insurance policies , and is the beneficiary of said life insurance policies , for tax purposes . By virtue of being irrevocable , it is not able to be changed by the person who has set it up to avoid paying estate taxes on the proceeds .
The term irrevocable means that the policy can not be changed . For example you can have an irrevocable beneficiary or an irrevocable owner . This is common in Medicaid planning utilizing an insurance policy irrevocably assigned to a Funeral or Estate Trust . By assigning the policy to an irrevocable trust , the cash value is no longer considered a countable asset by Medicaid as long as other conditions are also met . There are other reasons for irrevocably assigning a policy to a trust or entity depending on the need .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Life insurance is not usually referred to as irrevocable but there is such a thing as an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- that you may be referring to . This is a trust that owns one or more life insurance policies , and is the beneficiary of said life insurance policies , for tax purposes . By virtue of being irrevocable , it is not able to be changed by the person who has set it up to avoid paying estate taxes on the proceeds .
An irrevocable life insurance trust can protect the death benefit proceeds from estate taxes . However , an irrevocable life insurance trust has many strings attached , not the least of which is that the person making the trust can not make changes to the beneficiary of the policy . So visit with a knowledgeable agent , lawyer or tax professional when deciding whether an irrevocable life insurance trust is a good idea for your estate .
To create an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , start by meeting with your attorney to draft the trust . You yourself will not be able to make changes to it later so it is important to set it up correctly . It is also important that you set up an executor or trustee who you trust -LRB- the attorney who set it up is also often named trustee -RRB- . Then transfer Whole Life or Universal Life into the trust with the assistance of both your attorney and life insurance agent . Existing policies can be transferred with a change of policy owner form . New policies are set up with the irrevocable trust as owner . Once the Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust is active , you can visit with the trust executor about your ongoing wishes .
An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries .
To find out the cost of an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust you would need to ask your attorney . It is not wise to set up an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust with a software kit ; only an attorney with expertise in tax planning should set up this type of Trust . Once it is done , it can not be changed directly by the Insured , and the Trust is the Owner and Beneficiary of your policy or policies . That being said , if it is set up correctly and the Trustee is someone you trust -LRB- pardon the pun -RRB- , an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust can save you a large amount of estate taxes and allow you to transfer your estate in an orderly way .
Generally a person purchases a single premium life insurance policy with the trust as the irrevocable beneficiary . Irrevocable means that the beneficiary can not be changed . The Trust is usually also the owner of the policy preventing the insured from having access to the cash value . This is an excellent way to prepay a funeral without having to commit to a specific funeral home . These types of trusts are used to help protect assets from Medicaid . This type of trust is a funeral trust . There are other types of irrevocable trusts as well . A good agent familiar with care resource planning can help answer more of your questions and provide guidance on asset conservation in the later years of life when preservation of assets becomes more important than accumulation of assets .
The type of trust that is referred to as a life insurance trust is called an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . The owner of the life insurance must be the trust , so it is important to get the ILIT set up correctly . Not all trusts that are used for life insurance are Irrevocable Life Insurance Trusts . But that is the one most people are referring to when they talk about a life insurance trust .
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
In Canada if you have a named beneficiary and not your estate then the proceeds bypass probate and are paid directly to the beneficiary . If you name a beneficiary in the `` protected class '' , spouse , parent , child , grandchild , then the policy is potentially protected from the owner 's creditors during the lifetime of the person whose life is insured . In all provinces except Quebec , the relationship must be between the life insured and the beneficiary . In Quebec , it is between the owner and the beneficiary . If you designate a beneficiary as irrevocable , then the policy also has potential creditor protection . In addition no changes to the policy can be made without the irrevocable beneficiary 's consent . If a corporation is owner and paying the premiums on a policy , the the company should be the beneficiary otherwise it will be considered to be a taxable benefit . Ultimately , who should be named the beneficiary depends on what you want to accomplish . If you have any further question or feel I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community ,
Yes , a life insurance policy can be owned by a trust . Irrevocable Life Insurance Trusts -LRB- ILIT 's -RRB- are designed to keep life insurance proceeds from being calculated in the value of a large estate , and thus avoid paying estate taxes . The ILIT must be set up at least 3 years before death for tax protection purposes . When an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust is set up , the person whose estate is being protected can not have any incidences of ownership in the policy .
In Canada , products issued by a life insurance company , life insurance , annuities , investment funds -LRB- segregated fund , variable annuities -RRB- are afforded creditor protection if : The beneficiary is in the preferred class : spouse , child , grandchild or parent of the life insured or The beneficiary is irrevocable beneficiary . -LRB- No changes to contract can be made without written permission of an irrevocable beneficiary -RRB- Protection is in cases of unforeseen bankruptcy . Since there are circumstances where creditor protection may not apply , it is recommended that you consult a legal advisor to find out if you are eligible for this protection . When the death when received is an asset of the beneficiary and is protected from the creditors of the policy owner . No protection if the beneficiary is the policy owners 's estate . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Why use an irrevocable life insurance trust ? The main reason is to transfer the asset -LRB- life insurance is an asset -RRB- out of the direct ownership of the insured . Why ? While life insurance is income tax free in most all situations , it is not estate tax free when adding up all assets subject to estate taxes . For a person who may have an estate tax liability , an insurance trust makes good sense . Making it irrevocable just clearly makes a line of separation from the policy owner and their other assets .
Irrevocable beneficiary of life insurance means that the beneficiary of the policy can not be changed without the beneficiary 's consent . This differs from a revocable beneficiary , where the policy owner can change the beneficiary at any time . Irrevocable beneficiaries are sometimes used in policies where financial obligations are involved , such as using the life insurance to repay a loan , or to satisfy a divorce settlement .
When talking about a life insurance trust , most people are referring to an irrevocable trust set up for tax purposes . While a living trust is simply a trust made while the grantor is living , when most people refer to living trusts they are referring to revocable trusts . A life insurance trust is usually a living irrevocable trust : set up during the grantor 's lifetime but unable to be changed or revoked .
An Irrevocable Life Insurance Trusts is designed to ensure payments from an Insurance policy go towards a trust that has been pre-designed to determine how proceeds will be allocated upon one 's passing . This tool is used to ensure your wishes are carried out , as stated at the time the trust was established . One an Irrevocable Life Insurance trust is set up , the person who established the trust loses the ability to change how proceeds are later paid preventing anyone from changing the original intention of the trust .
There are many scenarios when the use of an irrevocable life insurance trust can be helpful . As the name says , it 's an irrevocable trust . Once the grantor contributes an item to the trust -LRB- e.g. life insurance death benefits -RRB- , they can not make any changes to the terms of the trust or take anything back out of it . It 's commonly used for estate planning purposes . When an ILIT is the owner and beneficiary of a life insurance policy , the death benefits wo n't be included in the calculation of the gross estate of the insured - when life insurance is paid to an individual , they are included in the insured 's taxable estate . Another common scenario is to control how proceeds are distributed to minors , or in some cases a financially irresponsible adult . For example , you have an individual who is not yet a legal adult and stands to inherit a substantial amount of money from the death of the insured -LRB- e.g. parent -RRB- . An ILIT can be set up to have a percentage paid out at age 21 , then another percentage at age 25 , and the rest at age 30 -LRB- or whatever alternate payout structure is desired when the ILIT is set up -RRB- .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is A Good Renters Insurance ?
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
Good renters insurance pays a claim to the greatest extent possible and makes you whole when you suffer a loss . This is true whether it is loss due to fire , or loss due to lawsuit . Good renters insurance also meets the requirements of your landlord . The place to buy good renters insurance is from a trusted insurance agent . This agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice , and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . Premium is a secondary consideration .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
Yes , a landlord can require a tenant to purchase renters insurance . Landlords are responsible for insurance that covers the dwelling , but renters are responsible for their belongings.Renters can also be held liable for any injuries that happen in the dwelling , which would be covered by the renters insurance . Since renters insurance is so inexpensive , it 's always a good idea to have renters insurance , rather than risk losing everything .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
To find good life insurance , find a good broker . He or she will help you determine what is good for you . What amount ... what cost ... what carrier are good for you ? A good broker will help you find out - and find this all out before you apply , so you can be confident of the outcome of underwriting . Good life insurance is a policy you are glad to buy .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Globe Life Insurance Good ?
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company has its home office in Oklahoma . The company is rated highly by AM Best at this date , so the products it carries are sound . Whether rates are competitive is something you can find out on your own by searching for instant life insurance quotes on the internet .
That is a great question ! Globe Life is a subsidiary of Torchmark , A Fortune 500 financial services company . they were originally Liberty National Insurance company until 1980 when they acquired Globe Life , and formed the torchmark holding company . My best guess would be that they have a portion of that company that handles their banking , that most likely goes through CUNA , -LRB- Credit Union National Association -RRB- , the marketing group for your mysterious CMFG -LRB- CUNA became CMFG in 2012 -RRB- . Or CMFG bought a part of Globe 's life business , which is a fairly common practice - The big financial companies buy/sell blocks of mortgages and other investments that may include life insurance policies in order to earn more money themselves . It may be that the CMFG people -LRB- who sell services to credit unions and consumers -RRB- bought a chunk of Globes business , with yours in it . I 'd call Globe , or drop them an email to their customer service people and ask them why , and make sure you know who owns your policy , so you know who to contact/collect from . It can be very confusing when high finance starts swapping assets , and we little folk try to keep track ... I had a mortgage that was sold 4 times that I know of ! Good luck , I would n't worry too much , just be sure . Thanks for asking !
I could not find any indication that Globe Life is associated with CMFG , but called Globe Life to confirm . Their representative said that if your policy is with Globe Life , your statement should say Globe Life . It may be that you have a policy with `` globe '' in the product title , or got your policy through Global Credit Union ?
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company was rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . This company , like every life insurance company , has their niche . Globe Life 's niche is doing policies online and through the mail . While handy , they do not allow people to get as much life insurance as they might want , and going through medical underwriting can save many people money vs buying No Exam coverage online . Whether Globe Life Insurance is good for you depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay .
The price of Globe Life Insurance depends on the type of policy you purchase , your age , gender , and other factors . So it is impossible to state a dollar amount for Globe Life Insurance . While the company offers some good rates , their choices for coverage are not too extensive . So you may want to contact Globe to see what rate you can get , then compare it with other companies using the quote engines provided on many websites .
Per Globe Life 's website , Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Touchmark Corporation , which is a holding company that specializes in life and supplemental health insurance , and has its main office in McKinney , TX . Globe Life 's home office is located in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma .
If you have a Globe Whole Life insurance policy that has accumulated cash value beyond any surrender charges or outstanding loans , you will most likely be able to cash it in . Call Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company at 972-540-6542 with your policy number to talk to a representative and see if you are able to cash in your Globe Life insurance policy .
That is an excellent question , and one that took some work to find for you ! The initials CMFG stand for CUNA Mutual Financial Group , according to the very nice operator I spoke with . CMFG is the parent company of CUNA , which is the parent company of Globe Life , where your policy was written . Globe will still pay you out when your claim is filed , but your monthly check is going to the parent company 's bank account . While things normally will roll downhill , apparently their premium payments roll uphill first ! I hope that sets your mind at ease , they seem like a solid company , and if they are all as good as that operator was , you 're in good hands . Have an awesome day , and thank you for asking !
Globe Life Insurance , well known for its $ 1 advertisement for the first month 's premium , is an A + rated carrier . As such , they are financially strong . My issue with Globe is in the small print . The level premium increases every 5 years making it virtually impossible for the insured 's to keep a policy at older ages . Most everyone I speak with about Globe was unaware of this important feature . Buyer beware !
That is a great question ! The only things that you need to have in order to borrow from your Globe Life -LRB- or any company 's life insurance policy -RRB- are these : First , that you are the owner of the policy . If Your parents bought it for you when you were young , and they are still the owners , you will not be able to borrow from it . They can , but you ca n't . You must be the owner of the policy . Second , it must be a whole life policy , as term policies have no cash value ; And third , that there is an adequate cash reserve to borrow from . If the policy is fairly new , there may not be much to borrow from , or if there has already been a loan taken , you may not be able to take more cash out , without tanking the policy . My advice would be to contact your agent , or Globe themselves , -LRB- have your policy number handy -RRB- and ask them if you are good to borrow . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
As Peggy stated above , if your Globe policy is a whole life policy and has grown some cash value the you should be able to borrow against it . However I would advise you to first find out what the interest rate is and if Globe uses `` direct recognition '' regarding policy loans . Because Globe is a stock company therefore the policy holders do not enjoy the sharing of dividends as with a mutual company . So you may be better off taking a loan from a bank if you ca get a low interest loan . For more on how `` Direct Recognition '' affects a policy loan and why it is imperative that you know their policy before taking a loan , please see the article here : WEBSITELINK
An insurance carrier is only as good as their rating . Globe Life in my opinion is a quality carrier for three reasons : 1 -RRB- over 50 years old 2 -RRB- A + credit rating 3 -RRB- Over $ 60 bil of life insurance in force The bottom-line is people buy it and have been buying it for a long time . They have to be doing something right to keep satisfied clients paying their premiums . For free real-time life insurance quotes through Globe and other carriers please visit : www.clminsure.com or call me directly at 561-320-2978
I do not know , however , companies occasionally voluntarily sell blocks of business to other companies . That could be the reason . CUNA Mutual Life insurance company might have bought some policies from Globe . Another possibility is that your state insurance commissioner could have directed the sale of some or all of the Globe business in your state for one of several reasons . It would be good for you to determine who is actually responsible to pay the death benefit . Your agent should be able to help you but a call to the help desk at either life insurance company should resolve the issue .
Globe life insurance markets term life insurance , whole life insurance , accidental death insurance , mortgage protection plans , and medicare supplements . Two versions of the whole life policies do build up cash value that you can borrow against . The Children 's whole life policy is called `` The Young American Plan '' and there is a Whole Life policy that adults can purchase . The face amounts of Globe policies are pretty low so if you are looking for policies to accumulate cash , there are better options available .
Globe life insurance is an A + rated life insurance company that has been around since 1951 . Globe offers term insurance , whole life insurance and children 's insurance . They have a deal where you pay $ 1 for the first month and then your premium is based on your age at the time of issue .
Do you mean Globe Life ? Globe Life is a life insurance company that offers final expense , accident , and mortgage protection insurance . They are certainly a legitimate insurer that focuses more on middle and working class families to offer them smaller insurance policies to meet financial obligations these people generally do not have the money on hand to meet .
Global Life Insurance is a reference to Globe Life Insurance . Globe is a company that sells life insurance online and through the mail . While popular with those who want smaller policies with little effort , it may not work for those who want larger policies or who want to shop for the lowest price .
Per their website , you can borrow money from a Globe Life Insurance policy . The policy must be Whole Life that you have had long enough to build up a cash value . You can take out a policy loan to borrow against the cash value that has built up in your Globe Whole Life policy .
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company began in 1951 in Oklahoma City Oklahoma and is a subsidiary of Torchmark Corporation . The company has more than 66 billion in force . In 1972 , Globe Life created Employee Services Division to service the Government organizations . It is one of the largest direct to consumer insurance companies in the U.S. .
If your Globe Life Insurance policy has net cash value after subtracting surrender charges and fees , you could cash it in just as you can any other Whole Life policy . Before doing so , you should talk to a Globe agent to see what other options your policy has , and to make sure you are making the correct choice in cashing it in .
end question
start question
annuities
What You Need To Know About Variable Annuities ?
In Canada , variable annuities are typically called segregated funds -LRB- the funds are segregated or separate from the other assets of the insurance company -RRB- . With payout variable annuities all or a portion of the income received depends on the performance of the funds chosen . A deferred or accumulation annuity -LRB- segregated fund -RRB- is similar to a mutual fund were the value depends on the performance of the funds you have chosen and your money is a risk . Since segregated funds are issued by insurance companies they contain death benefit and maturity guarantees . Some offer resets so you can lock in gains . Your advisor will be required to give you with an information folder prior to purchase to provide you with complete disclosure . You will find additional information on my website www.jpw.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities are classified as a security . Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities have separate sub accounts using market equities and bond investments that can lose money and incur policy expenses . A personal financial profile needs to be created with a risk tolerance assessment before moving forward with the purchase of a non-qualified or qualified tax deferred variable annuities or the allocation of the separate sub accounts . Variable annuity policy expense loads can be a concern as policy expenses are paid out of deposits made into the annuity regardless of positive or negative performance . Variable annuities , like all annuities , are designed ultimately for generating income . You may want to consider purchasing an income rider that may offer guaranteed lifetime income .
Are we talking about fixed or variable ? I 'll assume fixed , so here goes ... Annuities , for a 5 year old : Do you know how a CD works ? An annuity is the same thing , just with a longer time until you get your money back . CD 's are issued by banks , Annuities are issued by insurance companies . Interest from CD 's are taxed each year while interest from annuities are not taxed until you take the money . Does this sound like a retirement account ? Yup , the IRS thinks so too . If you take money out before they want you to , you 're penalized 10 % -LRB- stupid government -RRB- . The longer the term , the higher the interest you should expect . CD for 12 months = low interest Annuity for 10 years = slightly more interest . Were you referring to variable annuities ? Think mutual fund account with higher fees -LRB- generally -RRB- . Now , riders ... no 5 year old would ever understand these ... except income riders . Here 's the deal : You get X percent of the balance of the account , paid to you for the rest of your life ... even if the account balance is $ 0.00 . What ? I still get paid when there 's no money left ? Yup ! That , my 5 year old friend , is an annuity -LRB- with an in come rider -RRB- . There 's a lot more to it than that . I could write a book on annuities -LRB- and many people have -RRB- . Make sure you work with a competent advisor who can speak your language . If they keep babbling about terms you do n't understand , move on and find someone else to work with .
Some advisers use invest for securities and save for non-securities . You can invest or save from your cash flow on a monthly basis or pay a lump sum deposit into an annuity . For investors : variable annuities , a security , are a mid to long term investment when utilizing market equities and bonds via the separate sub accounts . Know your liquidity needs before investing and risk tolerance profile because you can lose money with variable annuities . For savers : fixed interest rate or indexed annuities , both non-securities , are short to midterm savings options . Know your liquidity needs before making a product purchase .
A non-qualified , tax deferred fixed rate annuity is only as guaranteed as the contract provisions outline and is only as good as the annuity insurance company that issued the contract . That being said , many financial stable annuity insurance companies offer a non-qualified tax deferred fixed rate annuities , generally at 5 , 7 and 10 year periods . A non-qualified , tax deferred variable annuity is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . ;
Per IRS rules , you CAN NOT rollover a Variable Annuity to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . You can move a Variable Annuity into an Individual Retirement Account -LRB- IRA -RRB- however , turning non-qualified monies into qualified , meaning you have to follow the rules for IRA 's . I recommend that you reach out to your Representative who helped you set up your Annuity to talk about options you have available . Annuities have surrender charges which need to be taken into consideration . If you need a Representative , let me know .
A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals .
Is a variable annuity a security ? Yes , a variable annuity is subject to the same rules and oversight of the SEC that a security would be . A person selling variable annuities must be securities registered and comply with all the transaction rules established by FINRA and the SEC . One other thing to think about if you 're considering a variable annuity is that the RISK in type of product is more along the lines of a stock purchase than a nonqualified product like a fixed annuity .
That is a great question ! Unless you are referring to the company by that name that is here in Houston , I think you might be confusing two separate things . There are variable whole life policies , and there are variable annuities , and both are insurance products , but they are vastly different things . Both have few guarantees on performance , and can make or lose money based upon the performance of the underlying investments . Variable products are generally considered securities , and are regulated by the SEC , while normal life insurance and annuities are not . Annuities require a period of time , at which point they pay out a stream of income ; Life insurance pays when you pass away . The only other thing that I could imagine is a variable policy that is offering an income stream for the payout , as opposed to the lump sum benefit that is normally paid . I 'd have to know more about what you were looking at to be sure . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Long Can A Home Insurance Claim Take ?
Great Question . First of all if you have a current home insurance claim right now open I hope you are doing okay and hope it will resolve soon . A claim is hard to say on the time it takes to close the claim . It depends on the severity of the claim and if its home claim or Condo claim . But typically the insurance company would like to close most claims in 30 days or less .
Long Term Care Insurance is recommended for those having considerable assets . If you needed to go to a nursing home or assisted living facility , or receive home health care to assist you with your activities of daily living -LRB- dressing , eating , bathing , etc -RRB- , those institutions can go after your savings and investments while you are alive -LRB- if your spouse is alive , he/she can keep half -RRB- , and even take the proceeds from your home after you and your spouse die . If you have very little in the way of assets , long term care insurance is an unnecessary expense . But if you have assets you would like to protect , and can afford the premium , having long term care insurance is an excellent tool in planning your future , preserving your peace of mind , and paying the bills if needed . And a word about life insurance policies with living benefits . I am all in favor of them , but you do need to consider how much is `` enough '' when purchasing life insurance that you may want to use if you can no longer care for yourself . Nursing home costs average nearly $ 80,000 per year , nationally , for a semi-private room . Someone wanting to hire a round the clock caregiver in their home can expect to pay over $ 175,000 per year -LRB- $ 20 per hour -RRB- . It can be expensive to buy a permanent life insurance policy with face amounts large enough to cover even a couple years of care . Just be sure you understand how much of the life insurance face amount is available to you , what triggers it takes to get it , and when you can get it . Then compare it to the price of buying long term care insurance providing comparable benefits .
Oh wow , unfortunately there is no black and white answer to this question . It varies drastically from carrier to carrier but also from claim to claim . Your actual claim will determine a lot about how long the process will take to full resolution . If it is a simple `` fender bender '' where things are pretty cut and dry , you are talking a matter of a couple of days ... with our carriers and on claims like this as soon as the field adjustor can get out to inspect the car , they are usually cutting a check on the spot . If seen claims like this close in a day , but also have seem them take a couple of days to close simply due to scheduling issues . More serious claims take longer . If fault is in questions and police reports have to be pulled , this takes time . If there are serious injuries or death , these take a lot of time . Typically you do n't have to wait until the claim is settled to start the repairs on your vehicle . If you car is `` totaled '' you might have to wait until it is settled . Each claim and carrrier is different and you have the right to stay informed about the process . Your adjustor will no more than your agent so stay in contact with them and ask them direct questions about the length of time things should take and what you should expect during the process . Contact your local independent agent and ask them specifics on the claims process of their carriers .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
There are several factors that would determine how long it would take to get a home insurance . The first consideration would be the type of construction -LRB- brick , log , vinyl siding , etc -RRB- & how far is the closest fire hydrant and how far away is the fire department . The condition of the home would also be considered ... is it in need of repair or well maintained ? Is your credit good and have you filed claims in the past on other properties . Typically , most insurance companies have access to a large data base that keep info . There are some other factors as wellthat would be considered . Finally , some agents will have binding authority if the home is not high in value . In which case , you could get coverage on the home the same day it was quoted .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is Loss Of Use In Renters Insurance ?
Loss of use for renters insurance is basically the same as loss of use for homeowners insurance . In layman 's terms it means that the premise that is covered is unihabitable for a period of time due to a covered loss . Under these circumstances the insurance carrier will typically provide the insured with monitary compensation to secure another premise for a specified period of timeor up to the policy limits until the covered premise is deemed habitable again or the insured has secured another premise . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any limitations that there may be .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
Most people consider purchasing renter 's insurance to cover their personal belongings - most renter 's policies will pay for the loss of personal property due to theft , vandalism , fire , etc. . However , a renter 's policy can also provide coverage if you are personally liable for injury to another person or damage to their property due to a non-vehicle related incident . In addition , a renter 's policy may also pay for `` loss of use '' due to a covered loss , meaning if you are forced to temporarily relocate due to said loss , there may be coverage for related expenses . Renter 's insurance is typically very affordable . Premiums can vary from one person to another , and some companies may offer better prices than others depending on your location , but I 've seen renter 's policies as low as $ 9 or $ 10/month . Please bear in mind that there are a lot of variables that affect your rate , and you may or may not be able to find renter 's insurance for this kind of price .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
Renters Insurance in the US is an outgrowth of the regular Homeowners Insurance policies that have been in use in many states since the mid 20th Century . In fact for many companies the forms in use continue to be variations -LRB- with appropriate state approvals -RRB- of forms developed by the Insurance Service Office , ISO . The Insurance Service Office is not alone in developing contractual homeowners and subsequently renters policy forms in use in the various states . There are other product development groups and larger companies often develop their own product offerings . With all that said , there are some common elements to homeowner and renters policy and by far the use of annual -LRB- 12 month terms predominates -RRB- . Decades ago there were companies using forms that lasted as much as three years for homeowners , but the reality of getting appropriate approvals from the regulators , responding to loss results and getting mortgage companies to accept the policies has all led to a fairly standardized approach in the US that homeowners and renters policies are primarily annual contracts . But do n't throw away all your old policies when you get to the end of a year if you are all aware of an event that might give rise to coverage during that time period . For example suppose during the term of your renters policy your dog bit a neighbor . That occurrence then would be associated with the payment of loss for the infliction of bodily injury even though the damage is only assessed completely for years to come . Her is why I mention dog bites . In many states you have absolute liability for your dog 's aggression . And , dogs who maul a victim are often attacking children -LRB- easier prey to the dog -RRB- and the damages are usually to the child 's head . Therefore as they age there can be a need for repeated surgeries to address the scaring . Since the renters policy is typically an occurrence policy , the policy which will respond is not the current insurer several years out , but the insurer at the time of the event or '' occurrence ''
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
Renters Insurance will pay for a hotel stay on a short term basis following a covered loss , the deductible will apply and the charge must be deemed normal and customaryand must not exceed the policy limit for Loss of Use . In order for insurance to pay for the hotel , the unit must not be in livable condition as a direct cause of the covered loss by the same policy contract . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive and important form of protection for one 's personal contents , loss of use and personal liability . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters Insurance will cover your personal property up to the limits of your policy . For example if you have $ 50,000 in personal property coverage in the policy and all your clothes and furniture were destroyed in the fire then you would be able to claim that as a loss . Renters Insurance only covers your personal property and does not cover the structure . It will also cover for losses for theft . Lets say you had your lap top from home in your car and someone broke in your car and stole the computer then you could file that as a claim on your renters insurance policy . Some renters insurance also covers for Loss of Use and Personal Property off premises . This may not be available from ever insurance carrier .
The standard renters insurance policy does not include ordinance or law coverage . Renters insurance does include `` loss of use '' coverage , which is triggered only in the event of a covered loss . If you are forced to evacuate from a wildfire , loss of use coverage would not kick in unless and until you had a loss from the fire . Evacuation is not a covered peril in and of itself .
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
There are several ways that you can purchase a renters policy . If you search the internet you will find some websites that will actually quote and issue a renters policy . The problem you face with this approach is that a policy is selected to pay your damages when you suffer a loss may be inadequate . It is quite likely that when you actually suffer that loss you will find that you are not sufficiently insured . Then the insurance policy you have been paying on becomes the most expensive policy that you could have purchased because it wont cover your loss . The better approach is to engage an insurance agent . You may not know an agent . Get recommendations from your neighbors , friends and colleagues . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . You really want everyone to be on the same page at the time of a loss . The agent will probably start by asking you the value of your personal property . To prepare for that question , I suggest that you take pictures of everything that you own . You can store that valuable record off site in case of a loss . Review the pictures and make an estimate of the cost to replace everything that you own . The sum of those estimates determines the value you need to set on your renters policy . Remember that you are looking at replacement value , not current value . In this process you might have property that is subject to internal limits within the policy . You need to specify the replacement value of any jewelry , guns , computer equipment , and collectibles . There are other classes of property that warrant special attention . Ask the agent about any unusual property that might be in your possession . The next thing that the agent will discuss is the liability limit . Insist on the highest limit that the agent can write . You can never have enough liability insurance . This protects you by providing for your defense and any awards against you up to the limits of the policy . You want these limits to be very high . A lawsuit can ruin your life . If you have a pet make sure that the agent knows about the pet . This is particularly important if you own a dog . Policies often have greatly reduced liability limits for dogs and may exclude all coverage for dogs of certain breeds or with a history of biting . This is a major source of claims . If you have a trampoline on the property makes sure that the agent knows that as well . Often owning a renters policy is a requirement of a lease . In those cases the landlord generally wants to be named as an additional insured . You need to have his or her name and address to provide to the agent . Incidentally , this is a reasonable requirement of the landlord and might be required by his or her insurance company . The final piece of information has to do with any losses that you might have previously suffered either at the unit you are currently renting or another unit . The information should be as detailed as possible to assist in underwriting your application .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
Good renters insurance pays a claim to the greatest extent possible and makes you whole when you suffer a loss . This is true whether it is loss due to fire , or loss due to lawsuit . Good renters insurance also meets the requirements of your landlord . The place to buy good renters insurance is from a trusted insurance agent . This agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice , and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . Premium is a secondary consideration .
If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a renter 's loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Renter 's '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you as the insured must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value.Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52 inch HD TV when it was actually an 18 inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How To Shop For Medicare Supplemental Insurance ?
Shopping for Medicare Supplement insurance can be confusing . You should find an independent insurance broker or agent , who can help you shop and also can explain the ins & outs of Medicare with you . A good agent will have multiple companies to offer you and will be able to discuss your particular needs and budget to determine what plan design and company would meet your needs . Most who carry Medicare Supplements will also be able to assist you with Part D coverage as well . There are also Medicare `` Advocates '' in many states who are trained by Medicare . They can be a tremendous help in educating people about Medicare in general , what product choices that a person will have & usually can assist in Part D enrollment . What I have found with these people is that even if they can discuss all of the supplement plans with someone - they can not actually enroll them , since they are not salespeople . But , they are a very good source of agnostic information . In addition , there are many online sources to run quotes & see rates . Even though that sounds like a good way to shop , it does n't provide overall education about differences in various companies , the issue basis of the policies being quoted , or any state specific laws and rules that could impact the person applying in the future . Even if someone has a good idea of various rates , it 's still best to sit down with a real person & make sure you receive all of the information necessary to make a good decision .
There are several ways to shop for Medicare supplemental insurance . You can go online , contact a carrier , talk to a Medicare representative , respond to solicitations by mail , invite an agent into your home . Most people buy from an agent in their home . If the agent only offers one plan , that is n't really shopping is it ? And who really wants strangers coming in their home ? If you have recently turned 65 you are no doubt inundated with mail solicitations . All of this is too confusing for most people . Buying without help is not advised . You can call Medicare direct , and some states have people who will answer your questions and help you decide . But how do you know if that person has enough experience to give you helpful answers ? This may be their first week on the job . Some think they will get a better `` deal '' if they buy direct from a carrier . Again , you never know anything about the person you are talking to , and how do you know they will be available to answer future questions ? Or you can go online . This is convenient but there are challenges here as well . Unless you visit a site from a local agent , you are probably giving up your personal information to a stranger in another state that will sell that information to numerous agents . This leads to multiple phone calls . Who wants that ? Another issue with online searches is this . You will only see a handful of options and will never see the lowest rates . We allow visitors to run their own rates from our site . They receive regular email notes with helpful tips following their initial visit . We send out personalized quotes to those who want them , showing multiple carriers . If you have questions , we listen and provide advice on the pro 's and con 's of each plan . And we allow you to decide and move forward at your own pace . All this is done by phone and email . You never have to get out of your pajama 's and get to pick the plan that best suits your needs and budget .
When shopping for Medicare Supplement do not just go by rates . Many agents will tell you that all plans are the same and the only difference is rates , and that is true . However , I have seen many companies go in to an area with rates that are low , only to raise the rates by 30 % or more the following year . Unless you like changing plans every year and you know your health will always be good , this is not necessarily the best way to go . Look for a company that is competitive , but that has a good history of rate increases , generally less than 10 % . Every agent is getting solicited by companies wanting them to sell their now lowest rate plan . Find a good local agent who has been around for a while . I personally like the AARP Med Sup . It is competitive and has an excellent rate history . It also uses community rating versus attained age rating . With attained age , which most companies use , you pay a low rate at first but every year you can count on a rate increase just because you got older , in addition to the rate increase the company has . With community rating , the rates are equaled over the ages so that you pay a little more at 65 for example but when you are 85 your rates will be lower than if you went with an attained age company . Also look for an agent that also does Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug plans . He will be able to help you decide which would be to your best advantage .
Medicare Supplement in Florida is affordable , but the specific rates depend on four factors : Where you live , your current age , male or female , and smoker or non-smoker . The rates are standardized , and the ability to change from one Medicare Supplement to another requires that you are approved through health underwriting . When you are turning 65 and looking for a Medicare Supplement , you have an open enrollment opportunity , with no health underwriting considerations at all . The most important thing to remember is that the plan that you picked when you turned 65 is not , necessarily , the plan you should stick with for the rest of your life . The rates go up with all companies and at different speeds . Your agent should be shopping the market for you at each and every anniversary of your policy . You should also pick an independent agent , as opposed to an agent that works for only one company . The difference in the premium offered by an agent that only works for AARP or Mutual of Omaha , vs. a broker that can bring any and all carriers , can be a difference of $ 100 per month or more . This is for the same , exact , standardized Medicare Supplement plan . All of the plans are the same - a Plan F with one carrier has the same benefits and providers that accept it , as the Plan F with the other companies . The only difference is the price . See your `` Medicare & You '' guidebook where it says this exact same thing . My agency has saved seniors over $ 1 million in premium since we 've been in business . Typically , the savings are $ 600 per year when we are shopping a plan from where they were with their old carrier . Again , demand that your agent shop these plans for you every year . Your doctor does not care what name is on the insurance card , or how much you paid in premiums . He or she is still going to give you great care . You should get the most insurance for the money , and with Medicare Supplement insurance in Florida , there is a great difference in the premiums for Medicare Supplement insurance .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
It depends on the are you live in and your individual situation . Humana is a Medicare Advantage Plan . Each area is different . If you can not afford a Medicare Supplement then I would shop for a good Medicare Advantage Plan in your area , it may be Humana or it may be another plan such as United Health Care , Aetna , or Anthem Blue Cross . A good local agent who is certified in Medicare Advantage plans and is familiar with the plans in your area can help guide you in the right direction . Every situation is different . A medicare Advantage Plan will offer more coverage than original Medicare . A Medicare Supplement offers even better coverage because it will pay in addition to original Medicare . Humana does offer a Medicare Supplement , but make sure you shop because they may not be the best option depending on where you live . Again , a good local agent can be a great help to you .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
Shopping for Medicare Supplement insurance can be confusing . You should find an independent insurance broker or agent , who can help you shop and also can explain the ins & outs of Medicare with you . A good agent will have multiple companies to offer you and will be able to discuss your particular needs and budget to determine what plan design and company would meet your needs . Most who carry Medicare Supplements will also be able to assist you with Part D coverage as well . There are also Medicare `` Advocates '' in many states who are trained by Medicare . They can be a tremendous help in educating people about Medicare in general , what product choices that a person will have & usually can assist in Part D enrollment . What I have found with these people is that even if they can discuss all of the supplement plans with someone - they can not actually enroll them , since they are not salespeople . But , they are a very good source of agnostic information . In addition , there are many online sources to run quotes & see rates . Even though that sounds like a good way to shop , it does n't provide overall education about differences in various companies , the issue basis of the policies being quoted , or any state specific laws and rules that could impact the person applying in the future . Even if someone has a good idea of various rates , it 's still best to sit down with a real person & make sure you receive all of the information necessary to make a good decision .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is A Water Heater Covered By Home Insurance ?
Your water heater is part of your home , just like th rest of your plumbing system , so yes , it would be covered . What it is covered for depends on what type of coverage you have purchased . For example home insurance does n't pay for mechanical failure , so if it just quits working you do n't have a claim . If your water heater bursts , you may have coverage for water damage coming out of the water heater if you havea `` Special Form '' policy . If the house burns up and your water heater goes along with it , your insurance should pay for a home with a water heater . So you see it depends a lot . Email me with specifics at WEBSITELINK
If your water heater just wears out then no homeowners insurance will not cover the water heater . If your water heater was to burst for example and water damaged your home then your insurance will cover the damage to the home but still will not cover the water heater . If something outside damages the water heater such as a fire , or falling object then the water heater would be covered .
Your water heater is part of your home , just like th rest of your plumbing system , so yes , it would be covered . What it is covered for depends on what type of coverage you have purchased . For example home insurance does n't pay for mechanical failure , so if it just quits working you do n't have a claim . If your water heater bursts , you may have coverage for water damage coming out of the water heater if you havea `` Special Form '' policy . If the house burns up and your water heater goes along with it , your insurance should pay for a home with a water heater . So you see it depends a lot . Email me with specifics at WEBSITELINK
It would depend on what happened to the water heater and what type of policy you have . If thewater heater is damaged in a fire , or a tornado , you should havecoverage . A `` special form '' insurance policy will normally cover damage from a burst water heater , so they will pay for the clean up of the water but not to replace the water heater it 's self , since it was the cause of the claim . Remember , an insurance policy is for damage , but not maintenance . So if it quits , or does n't function like it is supposed to , that is an expense you would have to absorb . If the water heater is damaged by a `` Covered peril '' -LRB- refer to your contract -RRB- - then yes , it is part of the house and covered like anything else .
Homeowners insurance does not cover the replacement of an old hot water heater but it MAY cover damage caused by a leaking hot water heater as long as the home owner is not found to have neglected the normal maintence of his home which does include replacing your water heater before it rusts through .
Typically a water heater will be covered if there is damage from a source OTHER than wear and tear or flood . The damage resulting from a water heater leak is generally covered . The one exception will be mold that forms away from the original water damage sight , if the mold becomes airborne . I would check with your local independent agent to make sure the company he/she selects for you has water damage coverage limits sufficient enough to cover a claim should it arise . Here in NC there are sub-limits to water damage claims .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . The resulting damage from a water heater that suddenly ruptures is a covered loss . The water heater itself is not covered but the resulting water damage to your personal belongings would be covered . Check your deductible before filing a claim to make sure it makes sense to file the claim .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
The homeowners policy will provide coverage for damage caused by a ruptured hot water heater . It will not replace the hot water heater , itself . It is very important to get assistance urgently as water damage never improves , it only gets worse . It is particularly critical if carpets or wood floors are involved .
This depends on the cause . If water is seeping though the walls , it typically is not covered as that would be considered maintenance . If the water is due to flood , it would only be covered under a flood policy . If the damage was due to a busted pipe or water heater , it would normally be covered . Repairs for common damp basements are not covered by homeowners insurance .
Great question . Your water heather is not something your home insurance will cover in a claim situation . You will have to pay to replace it yourself . Unless you have a home warranty policy that can cover your water heater . Good luck and you should always contact your local insuance broker for additional questions .
Boilers are a specialized form of insurance and include inspection services . The homeowners policy will cover a loss that results from a sudden release of water or steam . The vessel is the issue here and a homeowners policy does not cover the boiler . The same is true of a residential hot water heater . The policy will pay for loss as the result of a failure ; however , it will not replace the appliance .
This is a difficult question to answer without viewing your specific policy and the coverages contained in it . Is a water heater covered within a policy , generally yes . It just depends on what happens . For example , general wear and tare is not covered under the standard homeowners policy ; however , if you adding coverage for appliances or household items -LRB- that would have cost you more each year -RRB- or you pay for a home warranty , it could be covered for wear and tare . If the damage is from a busted pipe that occurred by no fault of your own or was from a power surge , it could be protected if the policy is setup correctly . It does come down to what exactly you have your policy and within the policy what the limits are . If you have a home warranty program that is always the best way to go because claims with the warranty companies will not result in higher premiums for your homeowners policy , but if you take a claim against your homeowners for the coverage -LRB- EVEN if it is n't covered -RRB- it could result in a slight increase in your prices for next year . If the cost is less than your deductible it would n't benefit you to make a claim on the home policy either .
It really depends upon the cause of the presumed damage to your water heater . If the unit simply fails , or bursts die to wear and tear , then the resulting water damage to your property may be covered but not the unit itself . If the unit is damaged as a result of a lightening strike , however , it may be possible that the damage to the unit may be covered under your Homeowners ' policy . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your contract .
Check with your insurance agent to find out if you have a `` named peril '' or `` all risk '' policy . This will help you determine when your water heater is covered under a homeowners policy . Normal wear and tear or maintenance is not covered . However , some companies are now offering a separate home warranty policy that can cover plumbing , electrical , heating and applicances .
Tenants should always have coverage because the dwelling policy the owner of the property will take out does not cover the tenants belongings . Policies a very affordable and as a tenant they can choose the amount of coverage they want to carry . Coverage for their belongings as well as liability in the event someone is injured and Pursues them legally . In the event a water heater breaks , roof leaks , a/c damages their belongings the renter could look toward their personal home policy .
If your asking can homeowners insurance cover your water heater because it wore out then the answer is no . Insurance polices are not maintenance polices and do not cover wear and tear . Some insurance polices do an option for mechanical breakdown at an extra premium but again , even this extension of coverage would not cover just plain old wearing out .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
end question
start question
annuities
How Are Variable Annuity Withdrawals Taxed ?
In Canada , variable annuities are called segregated for seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but because they are issued by insurance companies there are differences including maturity and death benefit guarantees . Withdrawals from a segregated fund are taxed differently depending on the underlying units , the gain could be taxed as a capital gain , interest or dividend income . You would need to confirm with the issuer to be certain . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Variable Annuities are taxed just the same as a traditional Fixed Annuity . If the Annuity is not in an IRA or other Qualified Plan , then any withdrawal is subject to capitol gains tax , both Federal and State . This is just on the `` Gains '' of the policy . If the Annuity is in an IRA or Qualified Retirement Plan , then withdrawals are taxed as Income . It is also important to note that any withdrawal before age 591/2 , is subject to a 10 % tax penalty . This is for IRA & non IRA Annuities . If the Annuity is a Variable Immediate Annuity , which pays an income stream to you , then things are a bit different . If it is an IRA then all income payments are taxed as Income . If it is not an IRA , then it is taxed under the exclusion ration . This `` excludes '' a certain percentage of the income from taxes , since it is considered basis -LRB- principle -RRB- .
You can generally withdraw money from an annuity at any time . However , you may be subject to a penalty and taxes . Annuities are generally meant to be long-term or at least a specified term such as 5 , 7 , 10 or more years . Each contact will have rules on how much you can take out annually without any penalty . Often it is 10 percent per year , after the first year . If you withdraw above the penalty-free withdrawal amount , you will pay a penalty . This annuity schedule is part of the contract and if you have questions about how to interpret , contact the agent that sold you the annuity or another qualified agent . Taxes will likely apply to any withdrawals at your ordinary income tax rate for that year . Also remember that if your annuity is a non-qualified account -LRB- not a Roth or IRA -RRB- and you withdraw prior to age 591/2 , the first dollars you withdraw will be considered your gain and be taxed at whatever your ordinary tax rate is for that year . There are ways to avoid the penalty -LRB- not the tax -RRB- for the withdrawal under section 72 -LRB- t -RRB- of the IRS code but you would have to agree to take level distributions until age 591/2 or for 5 years , whichever is longer . If you do n't follow this rule , you will be subject to a 10 % penalty going back to when you started early withdrawals from your annuity . Annuities can be a great product when the `` fit '' is correct . Your agent should make sure it is suitable upfront for your specific needs so you can avoid getting into an early withdrawal situation .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
Variable annuities have separate sub accounts with access to equity , bond and combinations for market returns with tax deferral of gains until withdrawals , surrender or annuitization . Variable annuity prospects must establish a financial risk tolerance to prove product suitability . Variable annuities can be purchased as non-qualified or qualified with additional riders such as guaranteed income riders that generate are dependent on annuitization . But keep in mind that variable annuities are securities and have the risk exposure of market conditions that could lose money in the cash value account .
Only in certain situations . Let me explain : If you purchase a variable life insurance policy , or a permanent policy that builds cash value inside it , you are funding that policy with after tax dollars . Meaning , you have already paid taxes on that money -LRB- income tax -RRB- . The money that continues to build and grow inside of that policy is tax deferred . If you decide to take cash out of that policy , lets say to buy a car , that is going to be considered a withdraw . You will only pay taxes on the amount that exceeds your cost basis -LRB- or the amount you have put in -RRB- . So it holds true , the longer you have your policy , the greater the cost basis will be . Instead of a withdraw from you cash account , their is another option to ` loan ' yourself the money . Much like you would from a bank or lender . There are several factors to be mindful of when you make yourself a loan from you policy . For example , if you loan yourself money that is the same amount , or exceeding the amount that is in the policy -LRB- cash in the policy -RRB- , you could be subject to ` income tax ' , which is higher than capital gains tax . There are any moving parts to this question , and is somewhat difficult to give an answer that will blanket everyone . But REMEMBER , the death benefit of the variable policy is paid to the beneficiary TAX FREE . Assuming that their are no estate taxes to contend with . As with any life insurance policy , it is best to set down and speak with a professional on the matter . It 's better to plan and know what to expect than to be surprised by a large tax bill !
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
Types you will hear reference to are : Fixed , Variable , Equity Indexed , Immediate , Deferred , Single Premium , Flexible Premium , with withdrawal penalties , and without withdrawal penalties . Fixed annuities provide guaranteed , fixed payments for the life of the contract . Variable annuities are tied to the market with minimal guarantees but potential for more growth . Immediate annuities are payed with a single premium . Deferred annuities have an accumulation phase in which premiums are paid in periodically .
The premiums paid constitute the basis for the annuity . Income tax has been deferred on the earnings of the annuity . The first withdrawals from an annuity are considered earnings and are taxed as ordinary income . If this withdrawal is prior to age 59 the earnings are subject to a 10 % penalty . Once the earnings are exhausted the basis is returned tax free . If the withdrawals are in an annuity only a portion of the withdrawal is taxed as earnings .
Withdrawing money from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- can be quite complicated and could be quite expensive . Since your employer has established the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the plan documents that govern your plan are in his office . The first thing to find out is whether in service withdrawals are allowed by the plan . Often there will be allowed withdrawals but the withdrawal must meet certain conditions . It is important to determine if you have the right to withdraw money from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- if you are still an employee . The rules also change if you leave your employer , whether voluntarily or involuntarily . You will probably find that your access to the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is much greater if you have left your job . If your employer is contributing to your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- there is probably a vesting schedule that is a part of the plan documents . The vesting schedule tells you the percentage of the employers contribution that is actually yours . Normally these vesting schedules run out several years so money that is received by the account may not actually be yours for a number of years . Your deposits will remain yours . These are the employers contributions that have a vesting schedule . If the money in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- has been deferred from current income tax you will be responsible to pay income tax as ordinary income in the year that you receive the money . If the money is in a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the withdrawal will be treated as a return of your contribution until you exhaust you basis -LRB- the total amount that you contributed . -RRB- The next major issue is your age . The rules vary a great deal if you are younger than fifty-nine and a half years old . If money can be withdrawn from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and you are younger than fifty-nine and a half years old you will be subject . Generally speaking withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- prior to age fifty-nine and a half are also treated to a special penalty tax of ten per cent . This is changed in addition to the ordinary income tax on the distribution . You can not avoid paying income tax on the money received but there are ways to avoid paying the ten per cent penalty tax . There are several general reasons . The first reason is if the amount is being withdrawn because the participant has died . A beneficiary will receive all of the distributions of the inherited 401 -LRB- k -RRB- free of the penalty tax . This can become complicated if the beneficiary is a spouse , please see a retirement income adviser or competent tax advisor prior to finalizing a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to a spouse . Another circumstance under which money can be taken from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- without paying the penalty tax is if the money is need due to the disability of the participant . This can also be true if money is needed to pay deductible medial expense . There is also a method of withdrawing money that can avoid the penalty tax . This can be quite complicated but the gist is to take the money in substantially equal period payments . If you think about a retirement annuity you will understand this concept . The payments should be designed to cover the lifetime of the participant . It is necessary for the participant to leave employment to use this technique . The computations for these payments are complicated but there are advisors who can help you should this be necessary . It is important to note that the penalty tax is only applicable until you reach age fifty-nine and half and the payments under this plan do not need to be continued after that point . Other retirement programs have additional exceptions that are more liberal than a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- IRAs , SEPs and SIMPLEs allow a $ 10,000 exemption to first-time homebuyers -LRB- this means anyone who is purchasing a home and hasnt owned a home for two years . -RRB- These plays also provide exceptions for higher education expenses -LRB- these must be taken in the year they are incurred , not the year that they are paid . -RRB- These plans offer exceptions for health insurance premiums for the unemployed . There is also a special rule for participants who are separating from their company and are more than fifty-five years old . There are ways to avoid the penalty tax but this requires careful tax planning .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
end question
start question
annuities
How To Hedge Variable Annuities ?
Fixed Indexed Annuities are a great hedge against inflation and a powerful bond substitute because they eliminate daily principal risk . Many newer fixed annuities provide an option linked to Gold which further hedges the risk of purchasing power being reduced as well which is an inherent risk of any annuity especially in the distribution phase .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
Fixed Indexed Annuities are a great hedge against inflation and a powerful bond substitute because they eliminate daily principal risk . Many newer fixed annuities provide an option linked to Gold which further hedges the risk of purchasing power being reduced as well which is an inherent risk of any annuity especially in the distribution phase .
Life insurance is essential in almost every financial plan . The exception may be the very wealthy . Think of it in these terms . When the rich invest money and they `` hedge their bets '' by investing in vehicles that go in opposite directions . That way if , for example , their stock goes down , their bond goes up . This keeps them from losing all of their money . For hard working folks their best asset to invest is their ability to earn a living . Therefore , if you die to soon and no longer earn , life insurance `` hedges your bet '' that your loved ones are still financially cared for . Therefore life insurance is a very essential part of the plan .
Life annuities have a variety of uses . Since as the name implies they generate an income for life they can be used to provide a guaranteed income for life for retirement income funding . in addition they can be used to provide a lifetime income for any other purpose such as providing a legacy . They can also be indexed to provide a hedge against inflation . If you have any further questions please do not hesitate to contact me .
Lesson One A Simple Lesson on How the S&P 500 Works -LRB- Since the AP Has No Clue -RRB- Oct. 4 , 2010 4:34 AM ET | 15 comments | About : SPDR S&P 500 Trust ETF -LRB- SPY -RRB- , IVV , VOO , SSO , SH , SDS For More Info contact I came across this disaster of a story from the Associated Press yesterday : `` Apple May Surpass Exxon As Most Valuable Company . '' Interesting - Apple -LRB- AAPL -RRB- is a monster - but I did n't expect the AP -LRB- that 's Associated Press , not to be confused with AAPL -RRB- to attempt to mis-educate their vast audience with this blatantly false nonsense that shows a thorough lack of understanding of how the SPX works : While Apple CEO Steve Jobs will no doubt be happy about his new perch atop the business world , there 's more at stake here than mere bragging rights . As soon as the total value of the company 's shares edges above Exxon 's , Apple will take over the top spot in the Standard and Poor 's 500 , the market index used by most professional money managers . That means that billions of dollars invested in funds that track the index will have to shift their holdings to reflect Apple 's new weighting . Exxon , meanwhile , may see its share price fall from the same effect . That slide could be accelerated by hedge funds and technical traders who make bets based on the rebalancing of major indexes and would be primed to short the shares of Exxon . '' Reminder : The S&P 500 is a market cap weighted index . That means that larger companies have a higher weight in the index . An S&P 500 index fund will own a certain percentage of the outstanding shares of each company . It does n't take a market expert to understand that when Apple 's share price rises , and its market cap rises , its value in your S&P 500 portfolio also rises ! As an S&P indexer , you do n't have to do a thing . Changes in market cap based on share price movement are automatically self adjusting - after all , market cap = share price x shares outstanding . On a quarterly basis , the S&P 500 rebalances its index based on new share issuance and buybacks -LRB- in other words , changes in shares outstanding -RRB- . For example , when Exxon -LRB- XOM -RRB- buys back shares , S&P 500 indexers will need to sell shares of XOM . If XOM does a secondary offering , indexers will need to buy shares of XOM . So if you own one you need to relax it corrects automatic so you need not worry .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
The reason for purchasing long term disability insurance is to `` hedge your bet '' against your most valuable asset . Most people 's most valuable asset is their ability to earn a living . If you are independently wealthy or have a lifetime residual income you need long term disability insurance . Just statistically speaking you are 8 times more likely to become disabled than you are to die . Almost 90 % of long term disabilities are due to an illness not injury . Be sure your policy covers both .
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
That is a great question ! Recent studies have shown that nearly 70 % of all Seniors will need some form of long term care during their retirement . Unfortunately for many , their retirement savings plan did not include the costs for that long term care . With some facilities costing upward of $ 80,000 per year , far too many Seniors have seen what they thought were adequate retirement savings get gobbled up quickly by those medical care costs . A long term care plan purchased early is a great hedge against those costs , and for the protection of your retirement and insurance funds . I seriously can not recommend strongly enough the value of adding this kind of policy to your portfolio . Thanks for asking !
That is an excellent question ! This kind of policy is generally one marketed to people who can not get a policy otherwise . There are typically few if any health questions , and about the only thing you need to have to purchase it is a valid ID , and the money . These policies are riskier for the insurer , so they hedge their bet by creating a `` graded '' or `` modified '' period at the beginning of the policy where the return if you die from any reason other than strictly defined accident is a return of what you paid in , plus some interest . These policies are for smaller face values , and are more expensive also . They are a great vehicle for someone who has issues that would otherwise make them uninsurable , but not the best fit for someone in good health . Please contact me if you would like to discuss this further , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Great question ! Insurance is designed to hedge against risk , and the more risk , the more expensive the insurance . Skydiving is one of those things that insurance companies consider risky , and so they tend to be a lot less cost friendly when it becomes something you choose to do . If you already have a policy , before your jump , ask your agent to find out exactly what would happen with your policy if , God forbid , something bad were to happen . If you are looking to get a policy , and skydiving is something that you enjoy doing , there are policies that you can get but most will have higher premiums , and more importantly , a period of years where your death benefit is reduced . I wholeheartedly suggest that you find out before the jump , as opposed to finding out after . If you want to discuss this further , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
That is an excellent question ! There are definitely ways that your life insurance can be used as a hedge against taxes . You will pay a lot more up front , but with careful planning , you can reap some sizable tax advantages . For example : With careful planning , the value of the death benefit can be excluded from estate taxes ; by paying larger premiums into a policy like a UL , or indexed UL , you can create a very large cash value that can be withdrawn tax free as an income until it is used up ; and in cash value policies , even if you withdraw more than the premiums you 've paid in , the amount is considered a loan , and again is tax free . There are dangers in doing these things , so you want to consult a good agent or tax advisor first , okay ? please contact me if you need help , and thanks for asking !
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
That is a great question ! You are very wise to be focused on accomplishing a goal for your retirement , and for setting an early goal . It is very difficult to give you a number that works for you though , without having a lot more detail about where you are in the process now . Are you 40 next year ? Realistically , that number would be different from what it would be if you are 25 next year . I also have no idea of your expenses , spending habits , medical needs , etc. . A good rule of thumb ? Have 8-10 times your current salary put away if you want to live your current lifestyle . I 'd also advise to have some type of hedge against long term care costs , as statistics show 70 % of Senior Citizens will require it at some point , and those costs have wrecked many a retirement fund that would have been fine otherwise . Pleas contact an advisor who can look at your situation , and give you some tailored advice . Thanks for asking !
Unfortunately , not everyone can purchase life insurance . Life insurance like all insurance products is a risk based product . Think of an actuary of an insurance company like a pit boss at a casino . In a raw form you the purchaser are hedging your bet that you may die within a period of time , for example 20 years if purchasing a 20 year level term policy . The actuary or `` pit boss '' is betting based on numerous factors of age , build , life style , occupation , etc. that you statistically wo n't die in the next 20 years . They set the premiums based on your risk factor . A high risk person , for example with terminal cancer , could not purchase a life insurance policy . Just be careful and read the fine print if purchasing a guaranteed issue life insurance policy . There are a lot of stipulations and exemptions built into those types of plans . I would recommend seeking help of an independent broker who will give you unbiased opinions .
That is a great question ! If you increased your mortgage , and there is a chance of leaving that debt behind , then it might be a really good idea to add a policy or increase your coverage to hedge against that risk . Knowing that your new mortgage is probably putting a dent into your available funds , I 'd suggest that you look into a term life insurance policy in an amount that would cover the amount of the new mortgage cost . Term policies will be much cheaper than a whole life policy would be , and there is really no reason for the extra expense of the insurance once the mortgage is paid off . A term policy lasts for a specified period of time , and then ends , which makes it perfect for this kind of need . Look for a straight term , or decreasing term policy to cover the mortgage debt . I 'd advise you to find a good independent agent in your area , maybe your homeowners or auto insurance people are a good place to start , if it will earn you discounts on those policies also . Any reputable life insurance agent can hook you up also . If you have any questions on term policies , please feel free to contact me , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! There are a couple of good reasons , one that is nicer to think about than the other , but both valid . The nicer one is that the cost of life insurance is a set price for whole life insurance . That means that if you purchase a policy for let us say , $ 5 a month for your child , they will still be paying $ 5 a month when they are 25 . The price never changes , despite whatever health issues arise . The other reason is that it is unfortunate but true that children die also . And their funerals are expensive also . If it would be a hardship for you to be able to bury your child , then that $ 5 a month is a really good hedge . Another reason is the one I alluded to above - if there is a health issue that surfaces that could impact significantly your child 's health throughout their life , then getting the affordable coverage before the issue arises is a huge blessing . Many companies have been forced by the slowed economy to increase premiums on policies for the less healthy , and to cut back on what they will accept as healthy . It 's a possibility that you may never have to worry about this -LRB- God willing , and I sincerely hope so -RRB- , but if there are health issues in your family lines , it might be a good thing to consider . You would want to look for a good independent agent in your area to look for the right policy for you . If you would like more information , please feel free to contact me , and we 'll go over your questions offline . I appreciate your asking , and if you do have a newborn , congrats !!
That is a great question , and one every parent asks , I think ! Here 's the deal . While we want to set our kids up so that they can be independent , there are some things that might not really be best to set up for them . Savings accounts , retirement vehicles , a credit card with low credit limits , and life insurances , those are great choices . Auto insurance maybe not so much . Here 's why : Your son 's age group is the highest at risk group for an auto insurer . As such , that means they are much more likely to have an accident , get a ticket , or cause major damage to themselves or others.That risk means that the insurer will hedge their chances of having to pay out by charging much higher rates for them . If he 's a safe and careful driver and the company offers safe driver discounts , he may come out ahead , but if there 's an issue , his rates would increase even higher . By putting him on your policy , he gets the advantage of better coverage than what he could afford , and lower rates , as he 's listed as a driver under your policy . If that 's affordable for you , perhaps it would work out better to keep him there until he moves away , or has a couple of safe driving years under his belt . That said , maybe the responsibility of having to pay for himself might be impetus enough to be careful and safe ... I hope that gives you something to work with as you try to decide . You know your son better than anyone , and I 'm certain that you will make the best choice for him . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Cash Value Of Life Insurance Work ?
In simple terms , permanent life insurance requires premiums higher than what it takes to cover the cost of the death benefit . The surplus premium creates a `` cash value '' that grows over time . The cash value can be comprised of a guaranteed value plus a non-guaranteed component such as excess interest or dividends . The best way to see how cash value might work for you is to ask an agent for an `` illustration '' showing how the policy might work on a year by year schedule .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Which life insurance has cash value ? Typically whole life and universal life polices have cash value , although some term policies also have a guaranteed cash value . The cash value is essentially a byproduct of keeping the premium level . You pay more up front , so the build up of cash and its growth reduces the company 's amount at risk . How the cash value is calculated , how much is guaranteed and how much -LRB- if any -RRB- is variable , depends on the design of the policy . This is spelled out in the policy wording . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A term life insurance policy does not earn interest , either in the cash value or face amount . It does not earn interest on the cash value because there is no cash value in term life . The death benefit is exactly what you purchased , and does not grow due to interest earned . Permanent insurance does earn interest . However , it is not as simple as putting money in a savings account and having the cash grow by a certain percent . A current illustration will show how your premium is applied to the costs in your policy , and how much it will grow at the stated interest rate .
There are two main types of life insurance . The first is term life insurance which has no cash value . Think of it as renting . The second type of life insurance is cash value life insurance . The most popular go by names like , whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . All of which have cash value that builds with time . If you have one of these types of plans , look for the pages marked `` illustrations '' . You will find a cash value column explaining how much cash is built up in a given year . Most policies allow you to take a `` cash loan '' against them and keep your coverage in force . You may also cash out completely or roll the cash value to another plan . You will find the average policy will not have cash value until coverage has been in force for about 5 years .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
Yes , cash value life insurance can work as an investment . That said , comparing the returns of the stock market to a life insurance policy is sort of a fools errand . Why ? RISK . Risk is the thing that keeps people up at night , worried about their investments panning out or not . When you consider cash value life as part of your financial plan , you are choosing a conservative , low return , very low risk choice . This may free you up to be more aggressive in other investment options as your cash values become a fall back or `` if I screw up elsewhere , I 've still got this '' investment . Will cash values provide stock market returns while maintaining the relative safety ? Nope . Stock Market returns require taking Stock Market risks . The up and down of a portfolio . Cash Value life will in most cases continue to move upward over time slowly moving upward . While that does n't sound exciting , a few years back when the market slapped everybody back ten years , my cash values continued to grow as they do n't go backwards . Something to think about as you plan for your life . Cash value plans provide if you do n't come home and they provide if you do come home .
The cash value is the portion of whole life insurance that has built up so far in your cash account . Think of it like money in the bank . The way whole-life is designed , it has a level premium for the length of the policy or until it is paid off . What 's really happening is as the cash account grows , the actual insured amount reduces by the same amount . You become more and more self-insured each year . If you buy $ 100,000 whole-life policy , in the begining your insured amount is $ 100,000 and your cash value is zero . Many years later your cash value is $ 40,000 and the insured amount is $ 60,000 for a total death benefit of $ 100,000 . Several more years later your cash value is $ 90,000 and the Insured amount is $ 10,000 for a death benefit of $ 100,000 If you live to age that the policy endows -LRB- usually age 95 or 100 on older policies and age 121 on newer ones -RRB- the cash value is $ 100,000 and the insured amount is zero . You are now self insured . You can use the cash value while you are living by taking policy loans which are actually loans against the cash build up in your policy not actually withdrawals from the policy or you can cash surrender the policy and walk away with the cash . If you have a participating policy that pays dividends , you can have additional cash value and death benefit build up from that .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
There are several reasons . With cash value life insurance such as whole life , you do not have to worry about prmiums going up as you get older and most likely to need the insurance . The cash value can help provide a buffer if your financial situation changes . Every whole life policy as nonforfiture options in the contract . The cash value can help conserve a poliy utilizing thes options . If you can not afford the premiums any longer the cash value can be used to buy a reduced paid up policy according to a schedule in your policy . You can also stop making payments and the policy will continue in-force with the cash value buying extended term insurance until the cash value is used up . You can cash surrender the policy and get some equity . When you deduct the cash value of a policy from the total premiums you pay you will see that in the long run cash value insurance was far less expensive than buing term . You can also take a loan on your cash value that is very interest friendly and will have no repayment schedule , although it is always best to at least pay the interest since the amount of the loan would be deducted from the face amount when you die .
Your Life Insurance policy will have the specifics of the `` Grace Period '' that provides and cushion for you when you miss a payment . Life Insurance companies usually want youto keep you policy . Their Grace Period is usually 30 to 60 days depending on the policy and the company . The type of policy will make a difference as well . A Term Life Insurance policy does not have any `` Cash Value '' or a side account that can grow at an interest rate like a savings account and cover the missed premium . This `` Cash Value '' is a feature of a Universal Life policy . The Term Life policy would be in danger of lapsing much quicker and you are probably going to cancelled quicker . A Universal Life policy with cash value is going to use the saving portion to pay the premium . The Universal Life will lapse once the cash value is depleted and the grace period expires . You can call your agent or Life Insurance company and work out options on the Universal Life policy such as lower the `` Face Amount '' or amount of death benefit to help you make the policy last longer . `` Whole Life Insurance '' will have a grace period as well . Coverage options beyond the grace period become more complicated . This Whole Life policy also has a `` Cash Value '' or savings portion as well . You will be subject to the policy 's `` Non Forfeiture Options '' within the policy . These options are different for each policy . You will have to check your policy . Usually , there are 3 options : Return of the cash value to you minus any loans you took out , you can change to a lower amount of insurance that is `` Paid Up '' or you do not have to pay premiums for the amount of death benefit , or you can change to a `` Term Life Insurance '' policy for a specific period of time then the insurance stops .
Cash surrender value in lie insurance is the amount of money you would walk away with if you decided to end a permanent policy before you passed away , or before the policy matured . Term life insurance does not have any cash value , so has no cash surrender value . In Whole Life or Universal Life , there is a surrender charge deducted from the cash value the first years , so there may be little or no cash surrender value until you have had the Whole Life or Universal Life policy for a few years . The amount of surrender value will depend on how you funded the policy , whether you had any loans out against it , policy performance , and length of time the policy was in effect .
The concept of borrowing from a life insurance policy , whether it is a whole life or universal life insurance policy , is taxes . The idea of cash value life insurance is the ability to accumulate cash that is tax deferred . You may later in life or in your retirement be able to borrow down your cash value . This does two good things for you . It keeps your death benefit in tact , but can lower it as cash value is depleted and because you are borrowing your own money and the insurance company is charging you very low interest rate , Uncle Sam considers the money a loan and not income . This means your money is income tax free . Always seek the advice of your agent or company . There are a few caveats that you should be aware of while you are borrowing against your cash value life insurance policy , but it can be a very effective tool for you to use in retirement . You also have the choice to repay the cash value or not . Beware of cashing out your cash value life insurance policy because those proceeds are taxable .
Life insurance that has a cash value can be cashed in . When it is cashed in , the policy ends . There are some other options , such as borrowing from the cash value , that could be considered if you want to keep your policy in effect . Term life insurance does not have a cash value , and some permanent policies do not have more than a negligible cash value for years , or never generate much cash value . Those type of policies could be stopped , but could not be technically cashed in because there would be no cash to collect .
Do term life insurance policies have a cash surrender value ? Usually they do not . Cash value is essentially needed in a policy to keep the premium level . You pay more in early years and some of the premium is left after covering the risk for the year and it grows the amount at risk to the insurance company decreases . Might be easier to understand the concept using a $ 100.000 non-participating level premium whole life . The cost of insurance at age 40 is much less than at age 85 . You pay a level premium and there is a build up of guaranteed cash that grows at a guaranteed interest rate inside the policy . If you were to die at age 85 , you beneficiary receives the $ 100,000 face amount of the policy . The cash value build up is not paid separately , but is part of the death benefit . Most term policies are as the name suggest are for a specified term . The cash value is theoretically there to keep the premium level , but there is no cash surrender value . Some policies with a longer term for example 30 year term policies do have cash surrender values . These are just general guidelines and you would need to check the policy wordings to be sure . Working with an independent insurance broker , you should be able to find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Sell My Whole Life Insurance Policy ?
Life settlement companies may be interested in buying your whole life insurance policy . Generally , the insured person must have very advanced age or poor health for them to consider such a purchase . There are other options , such as having a relative pick up the premiums , setting up your policy to fund the premium , or cashing it in for surrender value . Contact someone you trust for assistance in making this decision .
Could be . Just make sure you know what youre gaining , and what youre losing . What if you sell it , and then need coverage again ? Would you be eligible , considering your medical condition and lifestyle ? Of course , you do understand the price would be higher simply because youre older than when you had taken out that policy originally . What about the cash value of the policy ? That might be higher than the selling price . Think about that . Do your research . Also remember that with whole life insurance , you would be parting with a product that gives just about the best guarantees around . Guaranteed premium . Guaranteed death benefit . And guaranteed cash value . Take a quick survey of the marketplace and see if any of other product gives you a better rate of return on the guaranteed cash . Having said all this , if you are dead set on selling the policy , you have to find a good settlement company with whom to do business . They are a dime a dozen . Get a referral to some good ones . Interview them . Let them compete for your business . What is the most one would pay ? You should know that they will underwrite you . Your age and medical condition are key . They will not take all comers . Older , and frankly sicker , insureds are their preference . You may not even be eligible . If that is the case , look again at your life insurance options . You might be able to get better value from a guaranteed universal life product . Would you like to keep learning ? Check my blog : planrisklive.com .
That is a great question ! There are companies out there that make a living off of other people 's hardships , and there are certainly ones that would buy your policy . I have to ask you why you are even considering this . They will not pay you near the face value , and you will be without coverage if you sell it . If you need cash , have you considered taking a loan out of the cash value ? Your coverage continues , and the process of getting the cash is very simple , and quick . Please consider talking this decision over with someone before acting upon it , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Let me share my experience.I 'm a licensed fee-based -LRB- accept no commissions -RRB- insurance consultant who has studied insurance , obtained a number of industry designations , owned and operated a general insurance agency for nearly forty years and helped thousands of insurance consumers with their insurance questions . I have long harbored ill will toward GEICO and other insurers who chose not to do business with independent agents . I believe their sales staff -LRB- and that of other insurers selling direct to the public -RRB- are trained to sell what the insurer wants to sell ; not what the consumer really needs . But I recently sought to purchase auto insurance for myself and checked out a number of on-line insurance offerings . GEICO 's premiums were one third of those indicated by E-surance , Progressive , and several others . The application process and live discussion with a sales person was cordial , professional and non-threatening . I was able to access my coverage information on-line , pay premiums directly and obtain insurance cards.Actually my experience was better than any I 've had with any independent agent . My conclusion , it is still important to know what you need and want . It is you against a large insurer and that means be cautious . But for my money I certainly would consider GEICO as an insurer.If nothing else they deserve a look .
Most agents who sell Term Life Insurance also sell Whole Life . The exception may be some of the `` term shops '' on the internet . Final expense policies are usually Whole Life , so agents specializing in Senior life insurance would carry Whole Life . These usually have under $ 100,000 face amounts . `` Captive '' agencies -LRB- where they sell products for one company -RRB- usually have good Whole Life products for persons looking for larger face amounts . So do agencies that sell multiple products , but you need to consult with a licensed agent who understands Whole Life . A good way to start would be to call and ask for an agent who can compare a couple of Whole Life policies for you in detail . If they are unable to do that , move on to the next one .
Why is whole life insurance bad ? Because I have something else to sell you or I have n't actually reviewed whole life because I am too lazy to learn about it as a product . Or my favorite , since the IRS created the MEC provision back in the 80 's which created a situation that if you put too much money into a policy , the tax advantages changed . Up until then , your local neighborhood stock broker would sell you life insurance as an investment as it 's qualities were very attractive to investors . Besides common sense tells me that insurance companies price their products based on the risk they bear providing insurance in every and I mean EVERY product they sell . Why would whole life be different ? Why would it be the `` only '' product witha higher price that is `` bad '' for the insured ?
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I sell my life insurance policy ? Well , number one , a life insurance policy is personal property . Could you sell it ? I think you can , usually through the life settlement market . But keep in mind that the original reason that you sold the life insurance was not to sell it for that specific purpose and most carriers and life insurance companies are going to take a dim view on you trying to buy insurance for just the purpose of selling it . But if the reason you bought life insurance does n't exist any longer , you could go ahead and sell it on the secondary market of life insurance settlement , and you can sell it for cash . Generally , a cash value contract is going to get a little bit more than what you have in your policy ; sometimes a lot more , depending upon the death benefit and your timeline . Can you sell it ? You could sell it and again , I recommend make sure that you 're doing this for the right reasons . And make sure that your coverage is no longer necessary .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Is Whole life insurance worth buying ? Well the answer is going to vary by the individual as people see worth differently . To me a decades old owner of whole life , all I can do is tell you why I purchased whole life . I liked the idea of owning the policy with a set price that can not be changed . I liked the terms of ownership did n't or could n't be changed over time . I like the steady boring returns to cash values that these policies produced . While my real estate , stock market and other investments have gone up and down , in many cases very dramatically , my boring whole life has done what it said it would . My whole life has NEVER gone backwards in value , it grows in good markets and bad ones . Is whole life the only thing you should purchase , well no . A good portfolio is a diverse portfolio . Whole life should be a part of it , but not all of it . Owning a whole life allows you to take risks elsewhere as you have a safety net .
You can get whole life insurance from an agency or website that sells it . Try calling to ask if they sell whole life in all face amounts , and ask the ratings of the companies through which their whole life insurance is sold . It the agency only sells it up to a certain face amount , they only sell final expense whole life . That is a good choice if you need final expense coverage , but to get whole life in larger face amounts , you need to make sure you are getting a competitive product .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
This is a Great question , I sell whole and term insurance . Some reasons in my practice that I sell whole life is because it is a permanent plan so a client normally can have this policy to age 100 , sometimes term is not an option because of age , etc , also whole life builds cash value that you can borrow against . It just depends on individual situations . Hope this helps .
Whole life policies are well suited for needs that do not diminish over time . Some commonly found uses for whole life are : Family protection : To provide funds to support a surviving spouse and/or minor children , particularly for individuals who start a family later in life ; to pay final bills , such as medical or other estate expenses and federal and state death taxes . Business planning : Whole life insurance is often used for many different business purposes , such as insuring key employees , in split-dollar insurance arrangements , and funding non-qualified deferred compensation plans . Business continuation planning often involves using whole life insurance as a source of funds for buy-sell agreements . Accumulation needs : Some individuals will use the cash value feature of whole life as a way of accumulating funds for specific purposes , such as funding college education , or as a supplemental source of retirement income . Charitable gifts : To provide funds for a gift to charity . Whole life insurance , sometimes called permanent insurance , or ordinary life , is designed to stay in force throughout ones lifetime . As long as the policy owner meets his or her obligations under the policy , the policy remains in force , regardless of any changes in health that may occur . Unlike term insurance , where premium payments generally increase , as the insured gets older -LRB- the chance of death increases with age -RRB- , premiums for most whole life policies remain level . A portion of each premium payment is set aside to earn interest . Over time , a whole life policy will develop cash values . The accumulated cash values form a reserve which enable the insurer to pay a policys full death benefit , while keeping premiums level . During life , many whole life policies have provisions to borrow a portion of the accumulated cash value . If a policy is terminated without the insured dying , there are various surrender options for the cash value available to a policy owner . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can You Buy Out Of State Health Insurance ?
No . Major medical insurance is controlled at the state level . For this reason you must purchase major medical insurance from an insurance carrier approved in your state of residence . With the most recent stage of implementation of the Affordable Care Act on January 1 , 2014 this has often resulted in stark contrasts in the cost of individual and small group health insurance depending upon which side of the state line a person or business is domiciled . As an agent in Memphis , Tennessee I can assure you that there are lots of people in Arkansas and Mississippi who wish they could purchase individual health insurance in Tennessee . The cost differences -LRB- which always varied from state to state -RRB- are now substantially different and higher for the residents of Arkansas and Mississippi . That 's not to say health insurance costs are n't higher in Tennessee in 2014 but they did go up far less than in surrounding states . You may have been confused by some politicians talking about allowing the purchase of health insurance policies across state lines . However , this is not how the Affordable Care Act is currently structured . While this idea sounds great on the face of it , it is neither practical nor a real solution for the cost problems individuals and small businesses are being presented with . All health care is local and just as the cost of living and real estate prices are vastly different from New York City to Omaha , Nebraska , the same is true of health care and the health insurance plans tied to it in a given geographic area .
Long term major medical policies will not be issued anywhere other than your primary physical residence . If you need health insurance outside of your state you would need to purchase a short term major medical . Unfortunately , these plans do not cover wellness , pre-existing conditions and only last for up to 12 months . A better route to go would be a long term major medical with a national PPO network allowing you access to the benefits across the country . For more information on out-of-state major medical plans visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
The answer to your question will vary depending upon your state of residence and what area of your state you live in as health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state and within various regions of a state . Also , how do you personally define affordable ? The plan with the lowest monthly premium will probably not cover anything except preventive care until you have met a deductible that may be in excess of $ 6000 . Is that affordable for your personal situation ? Or , would a plan with a higher monthly premium but that covers office visits and prescription drugs with a copayment and has less out-of-pocket financial exposure better suit your needs ? These are the kinds of questions you will need to be answering for yourself as you consider what health insurance coverage offers you the best value proposition . As you may have gathered , making an informed decision about what health insurance to buy is no simple matter . You would be best served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is certified to sell health insurance both on and off of the government health insurance marketplace in your state to advise and guide you in this important purchase .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
It will depend upon what level of health insurance you purchase . Assuming you purchase major medical health insurance , it will now have to be in compliance with the Affordable Care Act . That said , what you may be purchasing can range from a `` Platinum '' level plan with very low out-of-pocket expenses for virtually all areas of health care to a `` Bronze '' plan that may not provide you any coverage at all until you have paid for more than $ 6000 in health care expenses out of your own pocket . One thing that is consistent across the four levels of health insurance plans now available -LRB- Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum -RRB- is that a wide range of preventive health care services will be covered at 100 % with no cost sharing by the subscriber . Yes , you are also buying `` peace of mind '' that in the event of a serious illness or injury that your personal financial exposure is limited to that $ 6000 + number each year -LRB- which will increase in future years -RRB- and you also are now buying guaranteed access to health insurance with no pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . In the abstract I think everyone agrees that these are good things . However , depending upon your income level what you may be buying may or may not be viewed by the individual as affordable to them . Having recently completed the first open enrollment season under ObamaCare it has surprised me how many people , even ones qualifying for substantial subsidies of their monthly health insurance premiums , still elected to remain uninsured . Clearly , the perceived value proposition of what you get from buying health insurance has a very subject answer that varies greatly from one person to the next .
This is important because rates and coverages vary from State to State . Each State decides its own car insurance requirements individually . If you get pulled over by the police and you do not have the right State coverages policy for that State you could receive a big fine . You may not have to buy coverage for that State if Let 's say you take your car to a new state for 2 or 3 month for a job assignment you might be fine keeping your home States insurance coverage . In any case , you should always check if using an out-of-State policy , check with your insurer to make sure its allowed and that you have enough protection for where youre headed for that State . Some insurance companies say it 's okay if youre only going to be in the non home State for no more than 60 days , still check to make sure .
Who does not have to buy health insurance ? Well , no one has to buy health insurance . You simply pay a tax for your decision not to . Also if you decide not to buy health insurance and you have a need later on you can only buy health insurance during an open enrollment window . So you could be very much out of luck to save a few dollars . Entirely your choice .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
1 -RRB- Make life easier on yourself - seek out an experienced local life & health insurance broker who is also certified to sell coverage through the government health insurance marketplace in your state . Health insurance is no longer only a health care and monthly budget issue in our lives , it is also a tax issue . Having professional guidance in making your selection is more important and more challenging than ever and it wo n't cost you any more to use a broker 's services , so look up some local brokers and put one to work for you . 2 -RRB- Healthcare.Gov -LRB- or your state 's health insurance marketplace if your state has its own -RRB- - you can strike out on your own by going to the web site for your state 's health insurance marketplace and shopping online . Buyer Beware - purchasing health insurance online is n't the same thing as buying a hotel room or an airline ticket . Try as they might , it is virtually impossible to present all the details a buyer should be aware of and consider and to anticipate all the unique questions each person will have in a web site . This is a problem because it is the insurance plans sold inside the health insurance marketplaces that are most likely to be built around narrow networks or restricted service areas . These can be the some of the unpleasant surprises the self-shopper can find themselves presented with if they do n't really do some serious homework . 3 -RRB- Other web sites - need I say more ? 4 -RRB- My web site at www.cdbsagency.com
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
Why are you being forced to buy health insurance ? Well , long story short , the Federal Government decided at this point in time that health insurance is no longer a state 's right to decide and have taken over oversight of health care . Prior to this federal act , states were left to decide how much or how little health insurance an individual had to buy . Some states -LRB- Haiwaii -RRB- have a sort of single payor . others allow much more choice in health plans including the choice not to purchase . While I would not consider going without insurance , I do agree it should be up to the individual to decide .
Every state has different laws when it comes to insurance . This is true of auto , home , and life insurance , as well as health insurance . Any company that wants to sell health insurance has to be registered in the state , and many companies are registered in multiple states . But , since each state has it 's own laws and regulations around the selling of insurance , insurance companies can only sell the insurance plan they have registered with the state . For this reason , you ca n't buy health insurance from a different state .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
The State Departments of Insurance -LRB- DOI -RRB- regulate and oversee long-term care insurance sold and administered in each state . The General Accounting Office of the federal government -LRB- GAO -RRB- works in concert with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- to monitor the activities of the State DOI , and audit their work as it relates to payment of claims by individual insurance carriers , rate changes and approvals , and sales practices . In 2008 , the GAO released a report `` State Oversight of Rate Setting and Claims Settlement Practices '' involving 10 sample states on the topicand reported the following : `` Regulators in the 10 states GAO reviewed oversee claims settlement practices by monitoring consumer complaints and conducting examinations in an effort to ensure that companies are complying with standards . Claims settlement standards in these states largely focus on timely investigation and payment of claims and prompt communication with consumers , but the standards adopted and how states define timeliness vary notably across the states . Regulators told GAO that reviewing consumer complaints is one of the primary methods for monitoring companies compliance with state standards . In addition to monitoring complaints , these regulators also said that they use examinations of company practices to identify any violations in standards that may require further action . Finally , state regulators in 6 of the 10 states in GAOs review reported that their states are considering additional protections related to claims settlement . For example , regulators in several states said that their states were considering an independent review process for consumers appealing claims denials . Such an addition may be useful as some regulators said that they lack authority to resolve complaints where , for example , the company and consumer disagree on a factual matter , such as a consumers eligibility for benefits . '' Each state has a DOI website which includes a subsection on long-term care insurance sold in that state . Their Internet addresses are usually something like www.insurance . -LSB- abbreviation of state , like ` AZ ' -RSB- . gov.They can also be googled '' -LSB- Name of state -RSB- State Department of Insurance '' .
Can you take out a life insurance policy on your grandmother ? That question , like most on this website , can not be answered with a straight yes or no . If your grandmother lives with you and you share in her income and expenses , you should be able to take out a policy of at least $ 100,000 on your grandmother . If you are buying a policy so that you can pay for her funeral , you should be able to take out at least $ 15,000 on her . If neither of those are the case , you may not be allowed to take out a policy on your grandmother . It depends on the circumstances , the company , and the type of policy you are buying . Insurance fraud often involves people taking out life insurance on older persons who have a short life expectancy , by younger people who have no financial interest in the lives of the Insured . Life insurance companies each strive to prevent that type of fraud in their own way , and thus you will find different regulations involving whether or not a grandchild can take out a policy on a grandparent . Suffice it to say that if the cause is legitimate , it is usually OK to take a life insurance policy out on a grandmother .
No one will be able to give you a perfect answer to this question until we have 2015 in the rear view mirror . Health insurance costs have always varied from state to state and ObamaCare has made the contrast between states quite stark in some cases . Combine this with the fact that how individual health insurance products were designed , rated and sold all underwent the biggest simultaneous change in the industry 's history and you have a situation where the entire health insurance marketplace has been turned upside down and we have a very foggy situation . In general terms , most individual consumers should anticipate at least a 10 % increase in their 2015 rates and be prepared to shop their coverage . Your results in your state may be quite different and it is not uncommon for some people to be receiving significantly higher rates increases . Rate filings for 2015 paint a confusing picture . Some state 's are reporting very moderate 2015 rate changes but those were also often the same states whose 2014 rates jumped the most . So , perhaps these state 's overpriced in year 1 of ObamaCare and the fact that they were only slightly off even then is n't exactly cause for cheer . Other states are seeing much higher rate increases for 2015 . Another factor complicating the cost picture are the government health insurance marketplaces themselves . Because of government administrative policies , the insurance carrier who has the second lowest cost Silver level product in each marketplace sets the bar for the amount that the government 's premium subsidy will be calculated to support . Owning this price point is a key competitive placement for the health insurance carriers in the marketplace . In year 1 this pricing position was usually held by a Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan or a national insurance carrier . In year 2 , many of year 1 's benchmark plans are now priced higher and have been replaced by a new plan and/or insurance carrier as the benchmark silver plan . And , in several states , the price leading plans in year 2 are experimental creations of ObamaCare called Co-Ops . These are non-profit programs that fill the role of a health insurance plan but are initially funded with Federal grant dollars . The year 1 track record of the Co-Op plans was mixed at best . Their year 2 positioning indicates a move to buy up market share quickly as the Federal grant dollars have a limited life span . Whether these experiments will be able to quickly develop the skills , financial reserves and enrollment base to allow them to survive independently is highly debatable .
First , check with your college 's office of student affairs or administration and see if they have a student health insurance plan . Due to the requirements of ObamaCare many of these plans have been cancelled or are being phased out but some do still exist . Next , you can be covered as a dependent on your parent 's health insurance policy until age 26 so if you have recently lost or will be losing coverage when you start school you could possibly be added onto their plan . Regarding true major medical individual health insurance you are pretty well locked out until the next open enrollment period starting on November 15th and the earliest you could be covered would be January 1 , 2015 . This is unless you have what is called a change of life status event -LRB- marriage , divorce , child birth or adoption , losing other coverage -RRB- in which case you have a 60-day time frame to apply for individual health insurance coverage . If you are in good health and coverage for any pre-existing health conditions is not a major concern for you then the best solution for immediate coverage would be to apply for a short term medical insurance policy . These policies are pretty affordable and depending upon the insurance carrier they may issue a policy that runs for a period just short of one year and you can often reapply for coverage . If you reside in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi contact me and I 'll be happy to help you out with this . If you reside in another state seek out a health insurance broker or go online and do a search for Short Term Medical . Assurant Health and United Healthcare/Golden Rule have pretty good short term policies and , of course , you would want to check with the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan in your state . Other than Medicaid that pretty well sums up your options as a student .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
Health Insurance rates change from insurance company to insurance company and State to State . Each insurance company must submit rates to their respective state insurance commissioner for approval . Some companies charge higher rates for smokers . Since the ACA came into effect an insurance company can no longer deny someone due to their health . ACA also permits a person to change plans off Open Enrollment if their income increases or decreases . Some States offer State run insurance options inside a State based exchange such as Washington and some are using the new ACA Federal Site . Rates are based on age so the younger you are the less you will pay ... and some insurance companies even base rates on smoking or non-smoking , as stated above . If you are in a State that offers a State based exchange you may apply through the exchange to see if you qualify for a Tax Credit -LRB- premium reduction -RRB- and/or a Cost Sharing reduction -LRB- lower Deductible , Co-Insurance , Max OOP , or Co-pays . Or you can choose to purchase direct through an insurance company if you do not wish to receive a Tax Credit or Cost Sharing reduction . You can only apply during Open Enrollment which for most states is Nov 15 , 2014 - Feb 15 , 2015 for the 2015 tax year , UNLESS you have a Qualifying Event . 2016 tax year Open Enrollment will be Nov 7 - Dec 15th , 2015 . A Qualifying Event is something that changes your status such as a Divorce , Marriage , Adoption , Birth , Loss of Job , COBRA Ends , etc. . So , all this to say that you will need to check with your State to find rates or use my site to compare rates for your State if your State is using the Federal Exchange for 2015 . I will list my site link on here in my next post . Stay tuned ! Or contact me at 971-327-5792 requesting rate information .
A health insurance exchange is a government-run marketplace where people can buy health insurance plans . One of the big questions everyone asks is whats the difference between buying a health plan on the exchange and off the exchange ? The key difference is the subsidies . You can only get a subsidy if youre buying your coverage on an exchange they can not be used towards plans purchased off the exchange . An advantage of buying a plan off the exchange is you will generally have more choices available for you to choose from . The same plan that is offered on the exchange and off the exchange may have some differences as well . Plans that are on the exchange may have more regulations , therefore requiring they feature additional benefits directly through the plan as opposed to needing a separate stand alone policy to provide the supplemental benefit -LRB- e.g. vision care , dental care , etc. -RRB- off the exchange plans may not be subject to the same standards . Off the exchange plans must still meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- including offering the 10 essential health benefits -RRB- . Its important to remember than not every plan that is offered off the exchanges will be available on the exchanges . Carriers reserve the right not to offer coverage on the exchanges . Thus , some states may have numerous plan selections for consumers where others may have limited choices . Also , not every type of health insurance plan is available on the exchanges short term policies and large group policies are not offered on exchanges at this time . There 's a lot of moving parts to health insurance and given the issues that have occurred with the new healthcare system rollout , it 's highly recommended you work with an experienced health insurance broker to make sure everything is in good order for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
annuities
What Is The Disadvantage Of A Fixed Annuity ?
That is a great question ! While a fixed annuity has a lot of great things going for it , there are a couple of things that you do need to look out for . The first is your liquidity . With any deferred annuity there is a period of time where the money you 've set aside to fund it can not be touched without incurring hefty fees , or damaging your earnings potential . If you suspect that you might need to access that cash at any point , then maybe an annuity might not be the right vehicle for you . The second involves the rate of return that you are promised off the annuity . Will the rate be enough after fees to outpace inflation and provide a return that is comparable to another investment vehicle ? If not , then again this might not be the best investment vehicle . As far as safe investments go , fixed annuities are among the best , but please be sure to really think it over , and work with a trusted adviser before purchasing one . Please make sure that it ia a suitable vehicle for you . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
A fixed annuity is a contract guaranteed by an insurance company . Insurance companies have failed although there are a lot of safety stops to preclude that . The benefit is contractual and is generally not adjusted by the cost of living . Your benefit could become less adequate with the passage of time . A fixed annuity may be currently paying one rate of interest , however the company is obligated to pay a lower rate of interest and that could become the situation .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
The major disadvantages of a fixed annuity are : the accumulation is set at a fixed interest rate and does not always keep pace with changes in the market . The owner of the annuity doesnt have any control over the investments that underlie the annuity . When the annuity is converted to lifetime income all control over the value of the annuity is released . These can be seen as disadvantages or advantages depending upon the need of the consumer .
That is a great question ! There are two things that could be seen as disadvantages to having a fixed rate annuity . One is inherent in all annuities , and that is the fact that the money is untouchable for several years , without paying penalties to withdraw it . If you change your mind , or feel that it was n't a good investment , it can be difficult to change without taking a hit financially . Annuities are a bad investment vehicle if you have liquidity issues . The second is that if your 're not receiving a rate that will outpace inflation and cover fees , you can actually lose money . If the guaranteed rate say , is 2 % , but the fees are 1 % and inflation is 1.5 % , you are actually losing money . The same could be said if the money invested in the annuity could have brought a higher return invested elsewhere . It 's important to really have a good advisor when looking at annuities , especially fixed ones , to ensure you get the best return possible . Thank you for asking !
The main disadvantage of Annuities is that your money is not 100 % liquid until your term is over . Some annuities have more liquidity than others ; most offer 10 % yearly penalty free liquidity . Some offer up to 20 % yearly liquidity , while some just offer 5 % . Most deferred annuities allow complete liquidity in the event of a terminal illness or a Long Term Care need . This is why it is important to work with an experienced independent agent who can evaluate your needs and help you find the right product for your situation . Another commonly cited disadvantage are `` high fees '' . But in fact , only Variable Annuities automatically include fees . But the fees do tend to be high in most peoples opinion . It is important to remember that a `` disadvantage '' all depends on perspective and what your needs are .
Annuities can have disadvantages based on the product profile and the client suitability . Annuities are generally purchased for future income . During the accumulation period , liquidity could be a concern based on limited withdrawals , surrender charges and could incur a penalty before age 59 . Long term guaranteed fixed interest rates , especially in a low interest rate environment , could be detrimental in a rising interest rate market where annuities could be difficult to move because of the liquidity items already mentioned . Some annuities are tied to domestic and foreign indices , with a possibility of non crediting years because of poor indices performance . Some annuities use separate sub accounts which use market equities and bond investment vehicles that have exposure to volatility , i.e. you could lose all your money in the cash value account .
Your question , `` What are the Advantages and Disadvantages of Life Insurance '' is a good starting point of inquiry . However there are several different types of life insurance and some additional options of the kinds of providers . I would say that the universal advantage that all the types of life insurance have is that they will pay a cash benefit to the beneficiaries of the policy that has a much greater value than it 's monetary cost . That is - as long as the policy is in force , and if the policy is a `` Universal '' life policy that the premiums must have been kept up with the pace of the increasing `` cost of insurance '' . And that 's what I hate about `` Universal '' life policies and would definitely count that as a DISadvantage . The greatest Advantages all around are achieved with Participating Whole Life policies with Mutual companies . The only thing that could be considered a disadvantage in these policies would be the higher premiums paid compared with Term policies . But that 's like comparing carrots to Filet Mignon . WHole life policies carry a much greater benefit -LRB- face/death value -RRB- than their cost . They also accumulate tax-free Cash Value that may be used , tax-free and even provide an income for retirement years . Participating Whole Life with Mutual companies are also eligible for Dividends in addition to the Guaranteed tax-free compounding interest paid to the cash value . And as long as the premiums are paid as agreed the policy will never expire . And the premiums will never increase . Also with these participating policies your benefit amount may increase over the life of the policy . Term and Universal policies do expire and that would be a disadvantage . With Term policies there is never a cash value , and with Universal policies there can be a cash value that grows for a number of years , but then it will usually be devoured by the increasing ` cost of insurance ' . All disadvantages . For more information see WEBSITELINK
That is a great question ! The biggest disadvantage to annuities is the lack of liquidity . For the first few years of the annuity , there are hefty surrender fees if something happens , and you need to pull some cash quickly . Most annuities will allow for a small fee free withdrawal , generally up to 10 % , but by taking even that cash , you greatly reduce the earnings potential of the annuity . Another disadvantage would arise if the rate of return on the annuity ended up being lower than what you might have received had the money been invested differently . If you 've got sufficient cash reserves and have done your homework before buying , neither of these should be an issue . Thanks for asking !
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
How much is life insurance for a 21 year old ? The amount of premium depends on several different factors . These factors are basically the same for any person at any age . It depends on the type of life insurance you are buying . Term insurance is generally cheaper for the term of the contract . However , once that term has expired the premiums usually increase . Whole-life insurance offers premiums that will not increase for the life of the insured as long as all premiums are kept current , as well as any other conditions of the contract . This allows for the young person to budget for the premiums over the course of the life of the insured . Whole-life insurance takes a little longer to mature . Therefore , just about the time the term insurance is about to run the course of the policy the whole-life insurance should be maturing . A good combination of these products covers the short-term needs , as well as , the long-term needs . There are also universal life policies to be considered . These products offer flexible premium amounts . Fixed annuities are considered a form of life insurance and these are beneficial for retirement . All of these products are great for the young person to consider and each has its advantages and disadvantages . Therefore , a well-balanced portfolio is essential so you can make use of all the advantages offered and limit the disadvantages of each product . In addition to the type of insurance you are purchasing , your gender , health , tobacco use or non-use , recent hospitalizations and sometimes your hobbies and career etc. will all be considered when calculating the premiums .
The advantages of having life insurance is knowing that your financial obligations will be taken care of and not a burden on your survivor . The disadvantage of life insurance is that for the vast majority the insureds do not match their Survivor 's need for cash upon their death with the ` Right Kind ' of insurance plan . Consider for example : a married insured whose Spouse relies upon their income to sustain the expenses of daily living . What is the ` Right Kind ' of Life Insurance plan and what is the ` Right Amount ' of death benefit ? Term Insurance 's disadvantage is the fact that very few deaths occur in the coverage period . Their need for income remains unprotected . Permanent plan 's disadvantage is the fact that only the wealthy can afford the face amounts required to support a Survivor 's need for lifetime income . Reversionary Annuity by design is the ` Right Kind ' of life insurance plan when Survivor Income is the need . It is much more affordable than Permanent plans and 100 % of the Surviving spouses will receive its benefit .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
You can purchase an Annuity from a few different sources . However the best way is to use an independent insurance agent who specializes in annuities . An independent agent can shop the market and all the different companies/products to give you the best annuity for your situation . You can also get annuities from captive insurance agents who work only for one company . They are limited -LRB- or highly encouraged -RRB- to just sell annuities from that one company . And since annuity rates are constantly changing and no one company has the best rates for all types of products , some consumers see this as a disadvantage . Some banks provide annuities , however their selection is often limited . Financial Advisors sometimes sell annuities as well as some stock brokers ; however , they usual stick to mainly variable annuities that are directly invested in the stock market . You can find an independent annuity expert online via a web search for them in your area . Or at various websites such as WEBSITELINK
As Lenny said , the biggest advantage of Term life insurance is it 's relatively low cost -LRB- although this is not always the case -RRB- . Another advantage is that it is a simple product , with few bells and whistles , so less complicated to buy than some permanent policies . It is a good choice for those who need life insurance for a set period of time and do n't care about cash value . The biggest disadvantage of term is that the cost will jump very high after the term ends . Another disadvantage is , if you miss two monthly payments , you will need to qualify medically to get your policy back . Some people find it a disadvantage to have to make regular payments , as you can not pay it off ahead of time , as you can with Universal or Whole Life .
What are the disadvantages to long term care ? First and foremost , price . Not necessarily the price you pay now for the policy , but the future potential cost of the policy . No one can say with any certainty what the cost of an existing policy will be in 5 to 10 years . That is the only real disadvantage to a long term care policy .
An annuity has a distinct advantage over other investments . That advantage is its ability to provide a lifetime income guaranteed . If that is the need , then an annuity is the only option . The second advantage is the income tax treatment given to an annuity . During the accumulation phase any gain on the policy regardless of its source is deferred until the annuity is surrendered or annuitized . Annuities can incorporate a wide range of investments which will allow an investor to change investment strategies with the passage of time . The biggest disadvantage to an annuity is that it is a long term program and capital is difficult to withdraw if needed in the early years of the contract .
Assuming youre addressing non-qualified annuities , the short answer is yes . Most financial planners who use annuities and estate planning attorneys need a compelling reason to place an annuity in a trust.There are three items that could be a disadvantage of holding an annuity in a trust : trust expenses , at the death of the annuitant , a grantor trust might trigger a taxable distribution event and the potential tax uncertainty of an entity holding ownership of an annuity .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Are The Benefits Of Disability Insurance ?
The benefits of having disability insurance during times of prolonged sickness or injury can be significant , especially if you 're like most Americans who have 90 days in case reserves . The benefits of disability is the tax free income it generates to keep your bills paid and allow you to live close to your lifestyle while disabled .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
Right Peggy !! The `` death benefit '' inside a disability policy is usually limited to a few months worth of the `` Monthly Benefit '' . So if your benefit is $ 3,000 a month , then you might get 3 , 6 , maybe 9 thousand in a death benefit . LOOK AT THE LANGUAGE . Does it pay ONLY AFTER you have met an elimination period or is it an immediate benefit ? Disability is a very important plan to own . Yet , I know that buying life insurance , buying disability , buying long term care , buying critical illness , & then buying home , auto , umbrella , & more can be very overwhelming ... . You might consider buying a Living benefits & / or Hybrid Life insurance plan ... These are life insurance plans that you can use BEFORE you die . I have a massage therapist that owns a plan with a death benefit , a $ 30,000 critical illness benefit , and has a $ 1000 a month disability benefit . She pays about $ 43 month for all of this . PERFECT for single mom with a modest income . YES ... standalone Disability has more features and better terms ... yet the all in one plan allows her to cover a critical illness , a disability , & early death . Reach out with questions :--RRB- - gravy
There are several reasons to considering buying Supplemental Disability Insurance . 1 -RRB- Group Disability policies usually pay 60 % of your income in event of disability , and if your employer paid the premiums , the benefits are taxed . Thus , the benefit you actually receive may be approx 45 % of your income . Supplemental Disability Insurance is not taxed and can possibly raise this benefit to 70 % to 80 % of your income . 2 -RRB- Any group benefit will be lost when you leave the group . Having Supplemental Disability Insurance can be valuable if you no longer qualify for Disability Insurance upon separating from a job and its group benefits . 3 -RRB- Group Disability coverage is often `` own occupation '' the first two years , then changes so that you will no longer receive your benefits if you can work at ANY job , not just your OWN type of job . Supplemental Disability Insurance can extend the own occupation feature to last longer than two years . You could also add other features such as a Cost of Living Adjustment rider .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
As with so many things in life , the answer is `` it depends '' . If you are talking about Social Security disability benefits it will depend upon the type of disability benefit you are receiving . Supplemental Security Income -LRB- SSI -RRB- disability benefits , which are for certain low income individuals e.g. - blind , aged , disabled and below certain income thresholds -RRB- who do not qualify for regular Social Security Disability can not have their SSI payments garnished for child support . On the other hand , standard Social Security Disability payments can be garnished to meet child support obligations . While it is much more complicated , it is also possible that a portion of VA disability benefits can be garnished for child support . Finally , if you are receiving disability payments through an individual or group disability insurance policy those payments can be garnished for child support purposes though the specifics vary from state to state .
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
What type of disability insurance should I get ? The one that provides you the best definiton of disability that you can afford . Disability insurance is all about the definition of what is a `` disability '' . What you 'll find is the best disability plans have the fewest words in describing what disability is . Without a solid definition , you have a policy you pay for , that does n't pay you back when you have a claim .
Yes , people can collect Social Security Disability benefits , and do not have to buy private Disability Insurance to get cash while being disabled . However , to get Social Security disability benefits you must generally be disabled for at least a year , and be unable to work -LRB- or be trained to work -RRB- at any job . Private Disability Insurance pays benefits more quickly . Also , with DI , if you have the `` own occupation '' feature , it pays if you can not work at your OWN job , not just ANY job . Finally , private disability insurance pays a higher benefit than Social Security DI . You can even supplement SSDI with DI .
Life Insurance covers just that , your life . When you pass , the beneficiaries will receive the death benefit you have in force . Long-Term Disability provides you a benefit while you are alive . So , no , Life Insurance does not cover Long-Term Disability ... . HOWEVER ... There are now some Life Insurance products which give you access to the death benefit if you have a Disability . Keep in mind , the death benefit is reduced if you use the benefit . The advantages are you pay only one premium for Life and Disability Insurance . The disadvantage is you take away the Life Insurance benefit and you have to meet certain qualifications in order to receive the benefit .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What License Is Needed To Sell Variable Life Insurance ?
Variable life insurance is another form of whole life insurance . There is no special license needed . As long as you have a license to sell life insurance you would be able to sell variable life . Which license you need to sell life insurance varies state to state . In my state of Florida all you need is a 2-15 or a 2-14 license .
Variable life insurance is another form of whole life insurance . There is no special license needed . As long as you have a license to sell life insurance you would be able to sell variable life . Which license you need to sell life insurance varies state to state . In my state of Florida all you need is a 2-15 or a 2-14 license .
There are two main types of annuities : Fixed and Variable . In order to sell Fixed annuities you need an insurance license for the state that you want to sell the annuity in . In order to sell a Variable annuity you need both an active state license as well as a securities license .
You can buy annuities from Life insurance agents who sell them . If the annuity you are seeking to purchase is a variable annuity , you will need to do business with an agent who has securities licenses that allow him/her to sell them . Non-variable -LRB- fixed or indexed -RRB- annuities do not require a securities license to sell them , just a Life insurance license .
Yes , you do need a license to sell life insurance in Maine . If selling products that do not involve securities , the license is simply called a Life Insurance Producer 's License issued by the Maine Department of Insurance . It requires passing an exam and paying fees to get that type of license . Selling variable products also require a couple of securities licenses .
The license you need to sell annuities depends on the type of annuity you intend to sell . For fixed and indexed annuities you need a regular life insurance license . For variable annuities you will need a securities license , specifically a FINRA series 6 license . A FINRA series 7 license will also work .
Universal Variable Life Insurance -LRB- or VUL - Variable Universal Life insurance -RRB- is a form of life insurance that has a death benefit and investment component . Agents who sell Variable Universal Life must have a securities license in addition to a life insurance license . The variable part of the title refers to the investment aspect ; the universal part of the title refers to the insurance aspect of this product .
To see fixed annuities , it takes an insurance license in Life and Annuities -LRB- the Life license covers both -RRB- . To sell variable annuities , it takes a series 6 -LRB- limited investment securities license -RRB- or series 7 license . The latter entitles the representative to work with all types of securities products , minus commodities and futures . If the agent selling fixed annuities needs to roll over funds from a qualified plan into the fixed annuity , a series 6 or 7 license is also required .
In California an agent must have a state insurance license that identifies them as a variable contracts agent , in order to sell a variable insurance product . To be licensed in that manner the state requires that the agent pass series 6 , 63 , or 7 of the FINRA exams . Then the agent must be appointed by a company offering equity indexed annuities to sell their variable products under the supervision of a broker-dealer .
Life insurance agents sell annuities because annuities are contracts with life insurance companies . If the annuities are not variable , any licensed life insurance agent can sell them . If buying a variable annuity , or if using qualified funds in the transaction , you must use a life insurance agent with the proper securities licenses .
You must have a Series 6 license , which is administered by FINRA and is also known as a limited-investment securities license . A Series 6 allows you to sell packaged investment products such as mutual funds and variable annuities . Additionally , the Series 63 , overseen by North American Securities Administrators Association , is a required license in most states . You should also be licensed as an insurance producer with a life qualification . A Series 7 license , administered by FINRA can also work for variable annuities . Always check with FINRA and your state insurance commissioner 's office to confirm requirements .
Universal Life Insurance , or UL , as it is written , is fixed . If you buy a Variable Universal Life policy , it will be labeled as such -LRB- or shortened to VUL -RRB- . You can not buy a Variable Universal Life insurance policy from an agent who is not registered with FINRA and licensed to sell securities . You can buy a UL from any agent licensed to sell life insurance .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Most basically a life insurance license is a license to sell life insurance . But you can think of it as a certificate issued by the State that certifies that the holder of the license has studied the laws governing life insurance and the practices involved , and has passed rigorous tests to verify that the person knows those laws and the serious consequences of violating them . The life insurance license makes the person eligible to be appointed by life insurance companies to sell their fixed life insurance and annuity products . THen the licensed person has to learn all about the products the company offers before they can actually sell them .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Yes , you can sell fixed and indexed annuities with a Life license . If you sell variable annuities you need a securities license . In addition , if your client is funding their fixed annuity with money from stocks , bonds , or mutual funds , you must have a series 6 , 7 , or 63 license in order to liquidate those funds and put them into the fixed annuity .
You buy annuities through licensed life insurance agents . If the annuity is variable , the agent must have some securities licenses in order to be able to sell it to you . If the annuity is fixed or indexed , an agent with a license in Life insurance can sell you that type of annuity .
A variable annuity is an insurance and a security product , governed the department of insurance in each state and FINRA . To sell variable annuities , you must be series 6 and 63 licensed in the state your client lives in . some variable group annuities are not classified as a security in some states , only a life license is necessary .
In Canada , variable annuities are called segregated funds or seg funds . Licensing is regulated provincially , and a life insurance license is what is required to sell variable annuities . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Yes , to sell life insurance in Illinois , you do need a license . If you are not working with variable products , a life insurance license offered through your state 's Dept of Insurance is sufficient . You will need to study for it and pass a test in order to get a life insurance license in Illinois .
end question
start question
life-insurance
My father had an accidental death policy but he committed suicide . Can I still file this claim ?
Most accidental death policies have an exclusion for suicide , which means it will not pay the benefit for death caused by suicide . If you can find a copy of your father 's policy , there will be a section listing exclusions . If you can not find a copy , you could call the company he got it through and ask them to look up the exclusions for you . This must be a horrific time for you , so feel free to contact me directly if you 'd like me to assist you .
First off , I am very sorry for the loss of your father , my condolences . Unfortunately , an accidental death policy will only pay the claim as an accidental death and will not cover a suicide . The only hope I can offer is if the death is questionable and may have been accidental , but if the ruling is for sure suicide , I am very sorry to say the claim will be denied .
Accidental death insurance policies are generally pretty specific . In other words accidental death policies do not cover `` natural causes '' or death caused by illness , heart attack , stroke and the like . In fact there 's usually a time limit within which a person must die as a result of an accident in order to be covered by the policy . So if a person is critically injured in an accident , but lives beyond the time limit then dies as a result of the injuries , the policy will not cover the death .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
This is an extremely sensitive topic . The death of a spouse can be life-shattering . A suicide can make it almost unbearable . Not too long ago a friend and client committed suicide . She had been going through a tough spell emotionally , and then almost out of the blue took her own life . Left behind a loving husband and three young boys . Very , very sad . I expedited the claim , as is my usual practice . This job is usually tough , and the fact that her family and mine are friendly made it really hard . My friend , her surviving husband , was so upset he could n't even complete the claim form . I did it for him . The insurance carrier paid the claim as the policy was over two years old . That is standard practice . Will they never pay before then ? I can say that I know of a case with a very high-profile insured who apparently committed suicide just a year after his policies were issued -LRB- he had several - lots of coverage -RRB- . The carriers , of course , initially refused to pay . The insured 's lawyers eventually convinced them to do so : why would they want the bad publicity of not paying a claim ? Will they always pay after two years ? My own feeling is yes , generally , but suspicious circumstances may interfere . If the carrier has reason to believe that this tragic event had been planned to take place right after the two-year anniversary . . Sometimes life is like a mystery novel .
First off , I am very sorry for the loss of your father , my condolences . Unfortunately , an accidental death policy will only pay the claim as an accidental death and will not cover a suicide . The only hope I can offer is if the death is questionable and may have been accidental , but if the ruling is for sure suicide , I am very sorry to say the claim will be denied .
Traditional term life insurance covers deaths that occur by both illness and injury . If you have a Accidental Death and Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- life insurance policy , then the death benefit will only pay proceeds if death occurs under accidental means -LRB- e.g. a car accident -RRB- . If you die by illness -LRB- e.g. heart attack , cancer , etc. -RRB- and are only covered by an AD&D life insurance policy , then no proceeds will be paid out . Please note , during the first 2 years of any life insurance policy , there is what 's called a `` contestability period '' in which if death occurs by suicide or it 's discovered upon review that the applicant intentionally lied on an application -LRB- committing fraud -RRB- , then the carrier can refuse to pay out a claim . After the 2 year contestability period has expired , then the carrier can not challenge these types of issues upon a claim . The reason for the contestability period is 2 years is deemed a fair amount of time for someone who thinks about committing suicide would have gotten help and tried to move past it by that point and carriers would have had enough time to find issues with a policy if fraud was present . If you 're looking for life insurance , I would suggest consulting with an experienced and knowledgeable independent insurance broker who can discuss your needs of coverage and what goals you want to have met with it while also comparing multiple insurance companies to secure the coverage at the lowest possible cost . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most accidental death policies have an exclusion for suicide , which means it will not pay the benefit for death caused by suicide . If you can find a copy of your father 's policy , there will be a section listing exclusions . If you can not find a copy , you could call the company he got it through and ask them to look up the exclusions for you . This must be a horrific time for you , so feel free to contact me directly if you 'd like me to assist you .
Yes , you can . And you do not have to settle for simplified issue policies with small face amounts . If you need several hundred thousand or several million dollars worth of coverage for your family or business , it could be done . I have done it . I have three cases for my files to share with you . One was a gentleman who was arrested for assaulting a police officer . It had to do with the officer breaking up a fight and accidentally getting hurt . The police department really went after my guy and forced him to serve time even though he did not cause the injury . I actually got the approval for coverage the day before he started his sentence . Another was a client who worked as a pharmacist . He unfortunately started taking some of the narcotic drugs he was distributing . He then became addicted to them and stole them . He was caught , served time , and then put on probation . The day after probation ended , he submitted his application . Approved as quoted . In another case , my client served time due to wire fraud . He was actually still on probation when he applied for coverage . Of course , I had prequalified him before submitting a formal application , so I had confirmed he was eligible for coverage . He was also approved as quoted . The fact of the matter is that criminal record is factored into underwriting , but an answer of yes on the application doesnt have to be a dealbreaker . There are companies that will work with you under certain circumstances . The broker has to know how to work with them . There is hope .
I actually have a sad story to relate on this topic from my client files . Ive had longtime friends as clients . He is an avid hunter . Of course , he keeps all his weapons under strict lock and key . Only his wife had access , besides himself . Unfortunately , she reached a time in life where many things got to her . She suffered in many ways . It was like , all of a sudden everything piled onto her . She became very forlorn , and very desperate . She had no hope . I guess she looked at that gun cabinet as the one source of relief . I helped her surviving husband file the claim for the life insurance benefit . He was so shaken , he couldnt even fill out the form . I did it for him . As you can imagine , this was a hugely emotional time . The claim check was received promptly . There had been full disclosure on the application , so there were no questions about hidden risks . Gun use , and hunting in particular , are interesting from a life insurance underwriting plan of you . I am a strong believer in the right of the citizenry to bear arms . They could be used for self-defense , or they could be used for hunting . Either way , they do represent an element of risk to mortality . This could stem from a hunting accident . Or it could stem from suicide . But as long as you go through full disclosure on your application , and you apply with the right company , your beneficiaries should have no problems getting their money .
Usually , upon presentation of proof of death and a claim form , the claim is paid . However , a claim could be denied , depending on circumstances . In Canada , a claim within the first 2 years could be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . This essentially means you did not tell or disclose the truth on something that would have changed an underwriting decision . After 2 years you would have to have committed fraud which is much more difficult to prove . A life insurance contract should be approached as a contract of utmost good faith where all parties give full disclosure . In other words , be sure and tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth . Suicide within the first 2 years or last reinstatement would also cause a claim to be denied . If there was an accidental death rider , then that portion of the claim would not be paid unless the death is deemed accidental . . Laws are similar , but vary by jurisdiction . You should check the wording in your policy , your local insurance act and , if necessary , a lawyer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
With the exception the insured dying at the hands of the beneficiary , the insured committing suicide in the first two years of a policy , and any contractual war clause exemptions ; life insurance pays the death claim whether by accident , disease or natural causes like old age . Accidental death or AD&D -LRB- accidental death and dismemberment -RRB- pays only accidents not disease . AD&D is less expensive because the actuarial accidental death statistics are so much lower than death caused by disease .
I feel like the poster child for this question with my father recently passing away at age 84 with 5 small , obscure , life insurance policies for which my mom just got paid . One was taken out when he was 16 years old from a company that we never heard of . I entered the name of the original company in a search engine and quickly found the name of the company now in charge of the policy . Our funeral director tracked it down . If you have the name of the company , you will find the money . If you do not have the policy number or do not know whether the deceased person even had life insurance , you can start by digging in their records and talking to relatives to see if the deceased person mentioned any to them . I have had calls from people who found my email on their relatives ' computers , asking if their loved ones had responded to the quotes I had given them . If all fails , life insurance that goes unclaimed can end up in the files of the state where it was purchased , after a few years . Check out this website for more information : WEBSITELINK
Accidental death , as it applies to life insurance , is death caused by accident . Most accidental death policies exclude accidental death caused by suicide , injury incurred while committing a felony , acts of war , or illegal drug use . They also generally will not pay the death benefit if the accident resulted from a mental of physical illness .
According to most sources that gather such information , the percentage of the population of the United States that owns some type of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs is around 7 % and holding . While theprobability of needing some type of extended-care for performing daily activities before death is quite high -LRB- about 1 in 4 will need up to 2 years of long-term care , slightly lower for men and higher for women -RRB- , two human factors come into play when the discussing transferring the payment of costs for such care to an insurance company : fear and denial . People are generally afraid to even consider how awful it would be to not be able to successfully perform common daily activities and need help from someone to do so . Families assume that since mom and dad took care of them as babies , they will take care of mom and dad when they need roughly the same type of attention and care . Thus , they console their elderly parents not to worry and fret about it . Others are simply in denial . `` Just take me out back and shoot me '' is a common demonstration of denial . One agent I know told me about an adult daughter that took her dad up on that . She asked , `` When should I shoot you ? '' Her father said , `` I 'll tell you when '' . So , when he started to need help getting around and the daughter offered to help , she held up a toy gun and asked , `` Now ? '' The father said , `` No , but soon . '' Of course , his condition became worse and worse until finally , he needed to be admitted to full-time care in a facility . The daughter asked again , as she had over the years , `` Do I shoot you now ? '' But , by this time , the only response her father could give was a tear . He had lost his ability to speak . Cost has become a real deterrent to the purchase of long-term care insurance . However , those that have had to go through the experience of taking care of an aged loved one usually find some way to afford at least some amount of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs . This insurance is not about the insured . It 's about the care-giver . Approximately 7 % of Americans have figured that out .
Yes , life insurance does cover natural death . This is different than Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance -LRB- AD&D -RRB- , which would only include death by accident . The one exception for life insurance not being covered comes within a suicide clause . This clause is generally included in the two year contestable period . The two contestable period provides protection for life insurance carriers . For example , if an individual falsely omits having depression during the application/interview process and commits suicide shortly after securing life insurance protection , a life insurance carrier may deny the death benefit claim .
To find out if your deceased father had life insurance , start by looking through his files . He should have a copy of the life insurance policy , or some evidence that he purchased one . If not , ask relatives or friends if they recall him ever talk about buying life insurance . Check with local financial agencies to see if they sold him one . If you know his favorite life insurance companies , you can call them to ask if there was any policy taken out on your father . Finally , if all else fails , keep any eye out for unclaimed property a few years down the road .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
Yes , unless it is an accidental death policy . That is why you buy life insurance , Life insurance will general cover a death by any means not specifically excluded in the policy . For example most life policies have a two year suicide clause , they would not pay for suicide within two years of taking out the policy . Most would not pay if a person is killed while committing a crime . Some will not pay for someone killed fighting in a war . There is a two year incontestability clause which allows the insurer to deny a claim if a client lies on an application and dies within two years . All of these are spelled out in your policy .
Unless you have an accidental death policy , your Life insurance would cover any type of death . Some policies may exclude war or act of war . Most policies also have a two year suicide clause , stating they will not pay if you commit suicide within two years of policy issue . There is also a two year incontestability clause which gives the insurance company the right to contest the pay out if they feel that there was erroneous information provided on the application that was relied upon to issue the policy within two years of policy issue . .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Assisted Living Homes ?
No , Medicare was never intended to be used for long term care . Medicare has very limited benefits when it comes to nursing home care and no benefits for assisted living . If you need help with assisted living and are being told by Medicaid that you have too many assets , a good care resource planner or elder law attorney may be able to help you preserve some of your assets and get you the help you need sooner .
Medicare is insurance coverage for `` medical care '' and does not cover the costs of assisted living facilities or long-term care facilities -LRB- custodial care -RRB- . Medicare will however cover qualified healthcare costs while a Medicare beneficiary is living at an assisted living facility . Medicare is more often used to pay for a skilled nursing facility or home health care . There are always exceptional circumstances that will allow Medicare to cover different types of care , for example , while in a qualified stay at a skilled nursing facility a Medicare beneficiary may also receive custodial care , but in most cases Medicare wont cover the costs of `` custodial care . '' In some states , Medicaid will pay for some of the costs associated with assisted livingif a qualified beneficiary has a limited income . Medicaid is designed to help seniors and some individuals with disabilities pay for healthcare when they are unable to pay for it themselves . Check on qualification requirements and available waiver programs for assisted living with your state Medicaid department . Individuals should seek out an extended care insurance specialist to understand options and formulate a plan to financially address assisted living or long term care needs before any such care may be needed . Jeffrey J. VanCleve 800-211-0017
Medicare does cover Home Health Care , BUT only if : its ordered by a Medicare approved physician AND the person in incapable of leaving the home AND services are rendered by a Medicare approved provider AND the person requires more than just assistance with activities of daily living -LRB- eating , bathing , dressing , toileting , functional mobility -RRB- . Medicare will not pay for services performed by immediate relatives or members of a patients household . Medicare does not pay for Assisted Living or Adult Day Care . If these conditions are met , Medicare will generally cover medical services in the home as ordered by a Medicare approved physician .
Medicare does not cover assisted living costs in New Mexico , as it does not cover the cost of assisted living in any of the 50 United States . Medicare Part A will continue to cover hospitalization and other expenses that it covered before moving to assisted living , as will Part B , Part D , etc. . But the residential costs , food , custodial care , etc will not be covered by Medicare .
No , Medicare Part B does not cover the residential cost of assisted living . Once you enter an assisted living residence , your Medicare Part B will still cover what it did before : medical equipment , outpatient doctor visits , etc. . But , unfortunately , neither Medicare Part A or B will cover the costs of living in an assisted living facility .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
You wont be able to use Medicare to pay for rent , meals , or anything non-medical related at an assisted living facility . Assisted living facilities are considered to be non-medical senior housing . If you live at an assisted living facility , you can continue to use your Medicare coverage for medical needs covered under Part A and Part B . Some people purchase long-term care insurance policies to help with the cost of an assisted living facility . You can also check with your local Medicaid office to see if you qualify for assistance . Medicaid is highly needs-based and the duration of stay at a facility is limited .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Most of the medical care related to Alzheimer 's disease is covered by Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital insurance -RRB- . If you have Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , your policy may help cover the co-insurance and deductibles associated with Original Medicare Part A and B . You can contact your insurance company or an insurance agent who specializes in Medicare Supplements to review your Medigap benefits . As for medications , a Part D prescription plan will cover most Alzheimers medications . Your costs -LRB- co-pays and deductibles -RRB- will depend on your plan . Unfortunately , long-term custodial care costs -LRB- nursing home , assisted living , or adult day care -RRB- are not covered by Medicare . Even hiring home help for bathing , toileting and dressing -LRB- custodial care -RRB- is not covered by Medicare unless the Medicare Beneficiary is receiving skilled-nursing care , physical or occupational therapy to assist with the recovery from an illness or injury . If I can be of further assistance , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Medicare does not cover Assisted Living at all . Medicare is very limited on its long term care benefits . You can only get assistance if you are hospitalized for three days , not counting day of discharge , and require skilled care . You can only stay in a nursing home for a maximum of 100 days . the first 20 days are covered in full as long as you meet the requirements , day 21 through 100 you will have a copay . You may also quaify from limited rehab services in your home . If you need assisted living you may qualify for certain veterens benefits if you or your spouse served in the military during a period of war . Your only other option is Medicaid . If you have assets see a good elder law attorney or Medicaid planner . It could save you a large portion of your assets and allow you to get help faster .
Medicare will not pay for Assisted Living because Medicare does not provide Long Term Care . Under Medicare Part A , Medicare will pay up to 100 days in a Skilled Nursing Facility . The whole purpose for Skilled Nursing is to get you better so you can go home . You will need to purchase a Long Term Care Policy to pay for Assisted Living as well as Nursing Home Care .
You would need Long Term Care Insurance if you were no longer able to care for yourself and wanted to receive your care in your home or other location besides a nursing home . Medicare will pay for home health care or nursing home care if there is a need for skilled nursing services . If you need assistance with dressing and showering but do n't need IV 's , physical therapy , speech therapy , or other skilled nursing care , Medicare will not pay for in home services , adult day care , assisted living , or nursing home . Long Term Care insurance will pay for all those options if you are unable to perform 2 or 3 activities of daily living .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Medicare only pays for skilled care for a limited time following a hospitalization for the same condition that caused the need for skilled care . In other words , Medicare does not pay for assisted living costs -LRB- except for medications , doctor appointments , and other Medicare approved expenses that it would approve no matter where you lived -RRB- . Most Long Term Care Insurance policies now cover assisted living . So purchasing LTCI can not only save you money , but can provide freedom in choosing your place of residence when you are unable to live independently .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Long term care insurance mitigates the cost of assisted living at home and/or nursing home care confinement . Most seniors need at least some assistance at home in their elder years , some need more than home assistance can provide . But some seniors need long term care in a nursing home 24/7 .
Some of the items and services that Medicare does n't cover include : < a title = '' Services that include medical and non-medical care provided to people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living , like dressing or bathing . Long-term supports and services can be provided at home , in the community , in assisted living , or in nursing homes . Individuals may need long-term supports and services at any age . Medicare and most health insurance plans do n't pay for long-term care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > Long-term care -LRB- also called < a title = '' Non-skilled personal care , like help with activities of daily living like bathing , dressing , eating , getting in or out of a bed or chair , moving around , and using the bathroom . It may also include the kind of health-related care that most people do themselves , like using eye drops . In most cases , Medicare does n't pay for custodial care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > custodial care -RRB- Most dental care Eye examinations related to prescribing glasses Dentures Cosmetic surgery Acupuncture Hearing aids and exams for fitting them Routine foot care You can go to the medicare.gov website and check on the main page if any test , item or service is covered by Medicare .
Medicare is not intended to help pay for assisted living . Medicare part A covers hospitalization , part B covers doctors services and medical supplies , and part D covers prescription drugs . Approved medical procedures delivered in an assisted living setting may be covered by Medicaid . However the cost of support for your activities of daily living would not be covered . Medicaid provides this coverage , but only after assets are spent down to under $ 2,000 .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Buy Motorcycle Insurance For 1 Month ?
Would you buy that coverage if they charged you the equivalent of six months premium ? Issuing a policy for a month is as expensive as issuing coverage for a year . The cost of insurance is calculated using an assumption that the policy will last the length of the term , be it six months or a year . That is why a `` short-rate '' table exists to calculate the premium earned when a policy is cancelled before the end of the policy term . A short rate is recognition of the administrative burden and the cost is passed along in the premium you are charged . You can buy a policy on a six month term or for a year and then just cancel it but do n't expect the actual cost for a month of insurance to be equal to 1/6th of 1/12th of the premium . It is likely to be much higher . But it is possible to end up with coverage for one month . You just may not like the premium charge when you 're done with the coverage .
Riding a motorcycle does not affect your life insurance rates . Only a bad driving record -LRB- or riding record in the case of motorcycles . -RRB- if you race motorcycles it can affect your rates or even acceptance with many companies . Thank you for asking about riding a motorcycle and not driving a motorcycle . It makes me cringe when people say `` I DRIVE a motorcycle . ''
Most auto insurance companies/vehicle insurance companiesoffer a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount : typically , a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is when you have 2 or more vehicles -LRB- cars , trucks , SUVs , motorcycles ... -RRB- on the same type ofpolicy . Insurance companies usually do n't allow the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount for different types of motorized vehicles on different policies . For example - if you have a car on one policy and a motorcycle on a different policy -LRB- but both policies are with the same insurance company -RRB- then usually you would not get a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount . You would get the multi-car discountif you have 2 cars insured on the same auto insurance policy . Also , most companies that insure motorcycles will give a multi-unit discount if you insure 2 or more motorcycles on the same motorcycle insurance policy . The key point with the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is that you are usually required to have 2 or more vehicles covered on the same policy . It is always best to review with your professional independent insurance broker to find the coverage options , as well as ways to secureall availablediscounts -LRB- so you wo n't end up paying more than you have to for your insurance -RRB- .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
No , riding a motorcycle will not affect life insurance rates unless you race motorcycles . Your life insurance application will not ask whether you own or ride a motorcycle . If you do participate in motorcycle races , you will need to fill out a form that asks how many races per year , how fast you go , etc. . The rate may or may not be impacted by that information .
No , owning a motorcycle does not affect life insurance . The only time motorcycle riding affects policy rates is if the motorcycle is used in racing or stunts . Then the policy can be rated up with table ratings , have a flat extra added to it , or possibly the application can be denied coverage .
Car insurance is usually more expensive than motorcycle insurance because the value of the vehicle is more . Also , there is likely to be more damage in an auto accident compared to a motorcycle accident . However , there are some very expensive motorcycles on the road that do cost more to insure than many cars . Of course , these cycles are very expensive bikes .
A stolen motorcycle is not covered under a renters or tenants policy . All coverage for a motorcycle is contained in a motorcycle policy . A renters or Tenants policy covers the personal property which specifically excludes motor vehicles . The only exception would be a motorized vehicle that is used to maintain the property and is not licensed for road use .
Your homeowners policy covers your personal property . In the policy definitions you will likely find that that does not include motorized vehicles of any type . There might be an exception for a vehicle used to maintain the premises -LRB- i.e. riding lawn mower . -RRB- Your motorcycle might be covered by a motorcycle policy . Coverage for loss by theft is frequently an option on motorcycle policies .
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Great Question . Usally health insurance cover you if you get hurt in a motorcycle accident . If you fall off your motorcycle and need medical attention you can go to your local hospital or urgent care and get service done . You also need to check with your health insurance company to see what is the limits and exclusion on the policy .
Yes , assuming that we are talking about normal use of a motorcycle for transportation , in that case it is no different than if you are involved in an auto accident . Your health insurance carrier will want to coordinate with any benefits you may receive for an accident under your vehicle insurance and that come sometimes lead to some frustrating back and forth between insurance companies as they argue over who pays what and when . If , you are engaging in certain types of activities with your motorcycle , especially if they are moneymaking or high risk activities you may find those activities excluded from coverage . So , if you just know you can do the Evel Kenevil jump across the Grand Canyon on national TV you had better get a special insurance policy for that kind of activity .
This would be the most general answer possible but over all motorcycle is less then auto . But there are many many factors that can cause rates to go either way as it pertains to usage and vehicle itself . Simple example is on the motorcycle policy you are insuring a 2012 25k in value Harley and the auto policy a 2000 Toyota Corolla . Driving experience and how the vehicles are used are determining factors . Really this is more comparing an apple to an orange .
No , I would say that owning a motorcycle will not affect your rates . The only way I see it affecting your rates is if you race your motorcycle competitively . In that case , you would need to fill out a hazardous sports questionnaire . Then the carrier would either rate up or exclude the activity .
Most renters policies do not cover motorized vehicles , unless they are used to service the insured premises . That exception is highly limited and does not cover vehicles that are licensed or designed for use on public roads . Coverage for the theft of a motorcycle is contained in a motorcycle policy .
Your health insurance policy will cover a motorcycle accident , if it is a qualified Marketplace plan in your state . Typically , ER and other major medical expenses are part of the benefit package . A deductible and/or coinsurance may apply , depending on which tier of plans you chose . Physical damage to the motorcycle -LRB- collision and comprehensive -RRB- would only be provided on a separate policy . A federal subsidy may have been available to help you pay for coverage . Open Enrollment allows you to change plans and compare all available options . Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier Health Insurance Broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated consumer websites that offer the lowest available rates .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
Insurance companies , for the most part insure your vehicle to it 's `` Actual Cash Value '' -LRB- AVC -RRB- . That is the starting point . Naturally , the newer the vehicle , the more likely that it will have a higher ACV . Some insurance providers are now offering coverage that will actually replace your car at full value should it be severly damaged in an accident so long as the car was aquired new within three years of the loss . Others extend that coverage to offer an amount necessary to buy a similar year make and model at current market value if damaged within 5 - to -7 years of purchase . Specialty providers for classic or antique cars , boats and motorcycles will insure the vehcle to it 's appraised value at the start so in many cases , you will need to obtain an appraisal when you purchase , much the same as when you buy a diamond engagement ring , for example .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is A NPI Number With Medicare ?
The NPI number is a ten digit identification number given to health care providers by the CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- . NPI stands for National Provider Identifier . It replaced the UPIN , Unique Provider Identification Number , in 2006 . Health care providers are required to use the NPI for HIPAA correspondence .
The NPI number is a ten digit identification number given to health care providers by the CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- . NPI stands for National Provider Identifier . It replaced the UPIN , Unique Provider Identification Number , in 2006 . Health care providers are required to use the NPI for HIPAA correspondence .
Medicare NPI stands for National Provider Identifier . It is a unique , 10 digit number issued to health care provides in the United States by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services . This number started being used rather than the UPIN -LRB- unique provider identification number -RRB- when HIPAA was introduced in 1996 .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
The Health Insurance Claim Number -LRB- HICN -RRB- is your ID number for Medicare claims . If you have your red , white and blue medicare card , it is the number -LRB- and letters -RRB- with your name . It is a combination of a number representing the primary person responsible for the Medicare insurance -LRB- often the social security number -RRB- followed by one or two letters or numbers to represent the relationship to the primary person .
The social security number is a necessary method of identifying you and your record . Most insurers use this number to zero in on your identity . Unfortunately , your social security number is used to identify you and your record to insurance carriers , and just about every other kind of business that is granting credit or coverage . Would n't it be nice to be able to protect this one vital bit of information and have another identifying number we could use ? But I digress ... But , as identifiers go , the social security number is probably the best current way for your creditors and insurance companies to make sure you are really you . Insurance is making a bigger and bigger use of credit base underwriting and pricing every year and most carriers use credit to one extent or another in insurance eligibility and pricing . Companies are also using vast data base records of claims and driving history that are often cataloged by your address , your name , your spouse , former addresses , and even the prior owners and subsequent owners of cars you have once owned and insured . With all the potential for confusion , your social security number is one unique bit of information that is n't easily duplicated in these claims and records databases . So , in that one way , your social security number helps keep you from being lumped together with others who may have a similar name , owned your car , or lived in the same house or apartment . Your social security number has been tied to credit reports and your borrowing for decades so insurance companies use this number to be as certain as possible they are looking at your record and not someone with a similar name . While the social security number has now been exploited for way to many reasons of identification , it is good that you still have one way to separate yourself from others with similarities that can cause confusion in underwriting and pricing your insurance and that is a good thing . Hope this helps .
The suffixes on a Medicare number are codes that tell Medicare under whose Social Security number you are being given benefits , and your relationship to that person . It is called the Beneficiary Identification Code -LRB- BIC -RRB- . A Social Security number followed by A tells Medicare that the person filing is the retired or disabled worker who paid into the system and is drawing on his/her own Medicare benefits . B signifies the wife -LRB- over age 65 -RRB- of the primary Social Security number . To see what the entire list of suffixes visit this website : WEBSITELINK
There is no part of Medicare titled Part T. Medicare consists of 4 main parts - A , B , C , and D . There are also 10 Medigap plans -LRB- a.k.a. Medicare supplement plans -RRB- - A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Are you perhaps referring to your Medicare claim number ? Your claim number is your social security number plus a letter . The letter T is one of the common ending characters to a claim number . If you have a claim number ending in `` T '' , it designates that you are either uninsured , but entitled to Part A or are fully insured and have elected to only take Part A. I hope that answers your question . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare numbers in most cases are your Social Security number plus a letter at the end . In some cases your Medicare number may be the Social Security number of your spouse . The letters at the end of your number designate your `` status '' as a Medicare beneficiary . A `` B '' at the end means you are retired . `` B1 '' means you are the spouse of a retired worker .
Medicare HIC stands for your Medicare Health Insurance Claim number or code . It begins with the Social Security number of the wage earner under whose benefits the eligible person is receiving Medicare . E.g. . If you are receiving benefits as the result of yours having paid into Medicare the required period of time , the Social Security number would be yours . If you are receiving Medicare benefits under your spouse 's employment , the Social Security number would be his or hers . The suffix behind the SSN indicates your relationship to that person .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
When you buy a home there are 3 numbers that come into play . The first number is the market price or purchase price . The second number is the assessed value which is what your taxes are based on . The third number is Replacement Cost which is the number used to insure your house . When insuring any home you need to make sure you have enough coverage to rebuild the structure . You do n't have to insure the land because if the house burns down the land is still going to be there . Replacement Cost for older homes is often the highest number because of the cost of materials and craftsmanship .
We get this question a lot here at The Medigap Market . Your medicare number will always consist of you or your spouses social security number with a letter at the end indicating any number of different statuses . If you have a letter T -LRB- Temporary -RRB- in your medicare number it means that you are not currently drawing social security payments . If and when you do begin drawing social security payments the T will be replaced by a letter A indicating you are the primary beneficiary drawing benefits under your social security number . In case you did n't already know , if you are not drawing social security your medicare part B premium will be billed to you quarterly and if you are drawing social security your Part B premium will be deducted automatically from your check every month .
Your Medicare number will normally stay the same unless you request to change it . Also , it normally does not need to renewed or replaced , so if you get a call asking for your Medicare number for purposes of renewal , do not give out that information . If you have asked for a replacement , it will be done by a written request . Medicare numbers can change if the circumstances for how your are receiving Medicare have changed . E.g. . You were receiving Medicare through a spouse who passed away , and remarried and are now receiving Medicare through a new spouse .
Your Medicare Part B number is the same as your Medicare Part A number . When you enroll in Medicare , you are assigned a claim number - this is typically going to be your social security number plus a letter on the end -LRB- designates certain conditions - e.g. only you are applying and not your spouse , on group coverage , etc. -RRB- . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Anyone who has Medicare will have noticed their Medicare number is generally their social security number with a letter added on to the end . If you see the letter `` T '' in your Medicare number , this means you have both Medicare Parts A & B , but are not yet receiving social security benefits .
Every person with Medicare will be eligible for drug coverage under a Medicare prescription drug plan , Part D . They are offered by insurance companies , approved by Medicare , in every part of the country . The plans cover both brand name drugs and generic drugs . You can enroll on the Medicare Plan Finder on Medicare.gov or you can call 1-800-MEDICARE -LRB- 1-800-633-4227 -RRB- . You will need your Medicare number on your Part A and/or Part B care and the date . You will find the number and date right on your Medicare card .
Your policy number is a number assigned to each individual policy to identify the policy that is associated with the owner of the policy . You will find your policy number located on your auto insurance ID card or declarations page . If you are unsure of your policy number I recommend you call your insurance provider and they can assist you in obtaining your policy number .
Health insurance policy numbers vary from one health insurance carrier to another . Some policy numbers will just be a string of digits like 8476932 with maybe a -01 , -02 , etc. , to designate the person is a spouse or dependent child under the policy . Other policy numbers can be a mixture a letters and numbers like A12345 . Your policy number will be shown on your policy certificate and on your ID card and is usually shown as Policy # ... .
One of the easiest ways to find out who your insurance carrier is for Medicare Advantage and / or Prescription Drug Plan coverage is through www.Medicare.gov . On the main page of Medicare.gov , click the button that says SIGN UP / CHANGE PLANS and then select Check Your Enrollment from the menu . Have your Medicare card handy . You 'll need to enter your zip code , Medicare Number , Last Name , Effective Date for Part A , Date of Birth and press the Continue Button . The next screen will display insurance carrier and plan information associated with your Medicare number . If you still have more questions regarding your Medicare insurance carrier , you can call Medicare directly at 1-800-MEDICARE .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Claim Car Insurance As A Business Expense ?
If you look at schedule C of Internal Revenue Code form 1040 you will see a place to enter insurance . An accountant would be the best person to ask about this , but most insurance agents deduct their own auto insurance every year unless they use mileage calculations to deduct auto expenses . Anything that is a cost of doing business is deductible .
This is a question best asked of your Tax Accountant or adviser . However , if your car is registered to your business or is used for business purposes , like other business related expenses , at least a portion of your car insurance premium may be able to be claimed as a business expense . Again , you need to ask this question to your tax adviser to be sure of your particular situation .
I am assuming this question relates to whether or not a policyholder can deduct their auto insurance premiums on their Federal or state income taxes . Unless the car is used for business purposes , the answer is `` no '' . However , if you use your car for business purposes , and your employer does not reimburse you for the business use of your car , there is a way to deduct a portion of your auto insurance premium . The IRS allows two ways to deduct expenses for the non-reimbursed use of your personal car . The first method is the mileage method . The IRS sets a mileage allowance every year , and that allowance is meant to cover fuel , wear and tear , maintenance , insurance , and other expenses . The second method is to keep track of all of the expenses related to your car , and then pro-rate those expenses by the amount of business use of your car . My employer reimburses me for the business use of my car using the mileage method . I do n't know if it 's worth the trouble to keep detailed records of your car expenses to make the second method worthwhile .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Normally , you can not deduct auto insurance from your taxes . If you are self-employed or own a business , a car used for that business can have expenses deducted with certain limitations . To fully deduct insurance and other expenses on a vehicle , it must be used 100 % for business purposes . If it is used for both personal and business , it becomes more complicated . With the simplest way , a flat amount per mile can be deducted for all business usage . The second way is to keep track of ALL expenses associated with the vehicle including gas , repairs , and insurance , as well as exact records about miles for business and personal use . The percentage of total miles used for business is the percentage of total expenses that can be deducted . Caution should always be used taking business deductions such as vehicle expenses and home office expenses as the rules are very strict and those types of deductions can increase the likelihood of an audit .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
That 's a great question ! The answer will depend upon what you are using the car for . If it is your family car , and the family insurance policy , sorry , but probably not . If you are using it for both family and work , then you want to get a tax attorney or tax professional 's opinion . You may be able to deduct a portion . If It 's a business car , with a business policy , then most likely yes , you can . Two things to remember : Always consult a tax expert when deciding what to claim as a deduction ; and if you are using the family car for business , and have it marked in some way to advertise or designate your business and get into an accident , you may get a nasty surprise when you file the claim . Many insurance companies will tell you that since the car was being used in a business capacity , it is not insured unless covered by a business policy and deny your claim . If you would like more information , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
This is a question best asked of your Tax Accountant or adviser . However , if your car is registered to your business or is used for business purposes , like other business related expenses , at least a portion of your car insurance premium may be able to be claimed as a business expense . Again , you need to ask this question to your tax adviser to be sure of your particular situation .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
I am not an accountant . There are two ways to claim the use of an automobile for business purposes . One way is to declare the miles driven in business . The government has an allowance that includes all expenses for operating the car . You apply that allowance to the mileage to determine your deduction . The other way is to itemize every expense of the automobile , in which case you would itemize the expense of the auto policy for that car .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
You have been operating your business for 6 years without incident which is great . This is the first claim -LRB- and hopefully last claim , -RRB- so I understand your concern about your premiums increasing next year . I 'm not exactly sure what your business does , but knowing what you do would help me to further figure out whether or not your premiums would increase because of this claim . When re-marketing your account with other insurance companies we would need to explain what happened and discuss the likelihood of this happening again . Insurerslook at the historical data associated with past claims , current trends , andalso consider estimations of future losses to help determinethe rates that they use.This is a great question and thereare several things you need to consider.When you get a moment , turn to the conditions section of your CGL policy . The conditions state what your duties are in the event of occurrence , claim , or suit . 1 . Notify company of occurrence a . You must see to it that we are notified as soon as practicable of an `` occurrence '' or an offense which may result in a claim . To the extent possible , notice should include : -LRB- 1 -RRB- How , when and where the `` occurrence '' or offense took place ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- the names and addresses of any injured persons and witnesses : and -LRB- 3 -RRB- The nature and location of any injury or damage arising out of the `` occurrence '' or offense . b . If a claim is made or `` suit '' is brought against any insured , you must : -LRB- 1 -RRB- Immediately record the specifics of the claim or `` suit '' and the date received : and -LRB- 2 -RRB- Notify us as soon as practicable If you read the `` Obligations at Insureds Own Cost `` condition it says : `` No insured will , except at the insured 's own cost , voluntarily make a payment , assume any obligation , or incur any expense , other than for first aid , without our consent . '' There are many questions that would need to be answered , but if I were you I would put my insurance carrier on notice that there has been an incident and let them take the reigns . Please contact me if you have any additional questions or concerns about this claim . I would be happy to help guide you in the right direction . Have a great weekend . Best , Josh DeBoer
Disability overhead insurance is coverage for a small business owner , to reimburse for his or her monthly business overhead expenses in the event of a disability . A simple example would include money to pay for the rent of the owner 's business location if that person were sick or hurt and could not work . Other monthly expenses are also eligible to be covered . This insurance can take a great burden off the business owner . otherwise these overhead expenses would have to be paid out of savings or other personal assets . The premise is that if the owner is disabled , business revenue will shrink or disappear , thus making it difficult or impossible to have the cash to pay the overhead expenses . Best to consult a local insurance professional for a complete analysis of the situation .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Estate Tax Apply To Life Insurance ?
Yes , estate tax does apply to life insurance . In 2012 , if the size of your estate -LRB- with life insurance proceeds included -RRB- exceeds $ 5,250,000 , estate tax would have to be paid on the excess at a top rate of 35 % . Some people take care of estate taxes by buying a life insurance policy to pay them . Some use an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- to own and be beneficiary of the policy . There is so much expertise needed in transactions like this that we hire a professional who understands both life insurance and tax strategies for large cases . Make sure you get the best advice possible to help preserve your hard earned estate .
That is a great question ! The answer lies in the size of the estate that you will leave behind . If you are leaving less than the 5.25 Million dollar threshold , then you do n't have to worry . I 'd suggest that you consult a good tax attorney , or estate planner , and have them help you set up a plan to avoid it in any event . There are several ways to do that , and those people can help . thank you for asking !
The unified credit for married couple exceeds 10 million , so in theory an estate with less than 10 million including life insurance shouldnt pay federal estate taxes . There is still state exposure that could expose the death benefit proceeds to state tax since most states do not use the federal threshold in the unified credit . Consult your tax attorney before moving forward with any purchase or retitling of assets .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy . The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is alegal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trustsreceive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy.The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
The state of Washington does not charge income tax on life insurance benefits left to a person as beneficiary . If the benefit is left to the estate , or no beneficiary is alive , the money will be taxed . Life insurance proceeds are considered part of the estate , and state and federal estate taxes apply to the excess above the amount of the estate that is exempted from estate taxes . In 2013 , the amount of the estate exempt from federal estate taxes is $ 5,250,000 .
The IRS does not tax most life insurance with income tax . If a cash value policy is a Modified Endowment Contract , the cash value is taxed . And if there is interest paid to a beneficiary because they are receiving their life insurance proceeds on a payment plan , the interest is taxed . Also , money left to the estate is taxed . But as a general rule , if money is life to a person as beneficiary , that person does not pay income tax on the life insurance received . Estate taxes do apply to life insurance , if the amount of the estate is above the exempted amount .
Life insurance proceeds are usually not subject to estate tax.If the amount of the life insurance brings the value of the estate over the exempted amount , the amount that exceeds the exemption will be subject to estate tax . The federal estate tax exemption in 2014 is 5.34 million dollars . Some states have estate and/or inheritance taxes , as well , with different limits . Estate tax does not generally apply when there is a surviving spouse .
A life insurance trust is a term often used to describe an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a form of trust drafted by an estate planning attorney in situations where it is intended that life insurance be held outside the client 's taxable estate . Such life insurance proceeds are usually planned to help pay estate taxes without having to sell existing estate assets . Otherwise , any life insurance owned by the client in their taxable estate would needlessly increase the value of the estate for estate tax purposes subjecting the estate to even higher estate taxes . With recent changes in estate tax exemptions , most individuals will not have to resort to ILIT in their estate plans unless their attorney suggests it for other non tax planning reasons .
In short , when it 's part of the calculation of the estate . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property to a spouse without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance proceeds in Arizona are not taxable if left to a beneficiary other than the estate . If the estate is the beneficiary , or if the named beneficiaries on the policy are no longer alive , income tax will apply . Federal estate taxes are charged if the life insurance proceeds plus the value of the estate exceed the exempted amount of $ 5,250,000 in 2013 . Only the excess amount is taxed . Arizona does not have a state estate or inheritance tax .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes , estate tax does apply to life insurance . In 2012 , if the size of your estate -LRB- with life insurance proceeds included -RRB- exceeds $ 5,250,000 , estate tax would have to be paid on the excess at a top rate of 35 % . Some people take care of estate taxes by buying a life insurance policy to pay them . Some use an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- to own and be beneficiary of the policy . There is so much expertise needed in transactions like this that we hire a professional who understands both life insurance and tax strategies for large cases . Make sure you get the best advice possible to help preserve your hard earned estate .
No , Life Insurance is not exempt from state or federal estate tax unless it is of an amount that is exempted by law . That amount varies by state for state estate taxes , and a few states do not have state estate tax -LRB- or inheritance tax -RRB- at all . The limit in 2013 for federal estate tax is $ 5,250,000 . If the estate is larger than that with life insurance proceeds included , federal estate tax will be owed on the amount that is not exempt . Life insurance that is properly set up in an irrevocable life insurance trust is not subject to estate tax .
The estate tax is a tax on the transfer of wealth at death to one 's heirs . The estate tax is due within nine months . The amount of an estate exempt from this tax is quite high right now - $ 5M indexed for inflation -LRB- $ 5.25 M in 2013 -RRB- . Thus very few estates -LRB- less than 1 % -RRB- actually pay an estate tax . In most cases , people buy life insurance to provide cash at death to pay this tax instead of liquidating other estate assets . If life insurance is held outside the taxable estate , it wo n't be subject to estate tax on the proceeds .
In the simplest terms life insurance helps in estate planning because it creates a pool of money upon death . This money can be used for any purpose , but in most cases when estate planning is involved , it is used to pay estate taxes due . The main reason people do this is it allows other assets to remain untouched by the estate tax reach . Examples would be a business , investments , art work , real estate , etc. . that would n't have to be liquidated to pay estate taxes . So the easiest and simpliest way to look at life insurance in an estate plan is to pay off Uncle Sam so Uncle goes away . Nothing does it quicker or easier than life insurance . Estate Planning does n't have to be hard , people just make it that way .
If the owner and insured person of a life insurance policy passes away , and has no surviving spouse , the death benefit of the policy will be added to the value of his/her estate . If this total exceeds state or federal estate tax exemptions , the excess would incur estate taxes . As of now , only 21 states have state estate and/or inheritance taxes . The exemption for federal estate taxes in 2013 is $ 5,250,000 . So the government taxes relatively few policies with estate taxes . Life insurance is not subject to income tax , except in some cash policy situations . If someone collects their life insurance proceeds periodically rather than in a lump sum , they will be paid interest on the as-yet-unpaid amount , and the interest is taxed . Generally speaking , the tax benefits of life insurance is one of the features that make is so desirable .
Life insurance proceeds rarely incur any form of income tax . The proceeds can be taxed for estate and inheritance tax purposes . Life insurance proceeds are included in the gross estate calculations for all deceased individuals . Any gross estates that have a total value exceeding $ 5.25 million can be subject to US Federal Estate Tax . Additionally , some states impose either an estate tax or inheritance tax -LRB- or in some rare cases both -RRB- . These taxes have their own specific rules about the total amount and what might be taxable . You should consult additional resources concerning state specific estate and/or inheritance taxes for more information about how life insurance proceeds might be taxed in your state .
An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Does The Average Life Insurance Policy Cost ?
This question does not have simple or straight forward answer . I can tell you that rates can range from about $ 20 to unlimited for many life insurance policies . Rates vary depending on type of policy that you are looking to purchase , the insured 's age , the insured 's health , and the insured 's family history just to name a few factors . Contact your local agent to discuss what your wants , needs , and expectations are of the policy so that they can help guide you to the proper policy for you .
Unfortunately there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs.The risk class is the most critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends ona number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Also affecting the premium for a policy is the type of policy you 're looking to secure - how much coverage do you want/need and for how long do you want/need it guaranteed for -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an independent insurance agent/broker to see what plans are available and what structure would be best suitable to meet your needs . You can send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button if you would like quotes and assistance with your and your family 's life insurance needs .
Since life insurance pricing is all mathematical and companies are all using similar if not exactly the same information , the costs for policies should be similar as well . However , there are two separate steps to determine what your cost might be . The average cost is determined by historical data , but the underwriting process evaluates your application to determine if it is average or standard . If there are concerns that affect your longevity , the company might offer insurance at something other than standard rates .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much a specific individual should be paying for health insurance is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost per person in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . You may also have options for group coverage through your employer . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The cost of life insurance increases with age . Obviously , the older we get the more likely we are to die , resulting in the life insurance company paying out a claim . In the words of George Lopez , `` Each Birthday is just another year closer to death '' or `` Studies have shown that the more birthdays you have the longer you live '' . The life insurance industry has amassed a large amount of data at what age people die and the cause of death . With a large enough population , they can predict accurately the average age of a man & woman at death , which helps them derive the cost of insurance based on the age of the insured . For example , in a 20-yr level term , they simply average out the cost of insurance for that 20 year span . For a permanent policy , they simply average the cost until the average age of death . So , all life insurance costs increase as we grow older . That is the reason why the premiums for insurance are much cheaper when we are younger . One last consideration ... because the cost of insurance increases , if you purchased a permanent -LRB- eg universal life , variable universal , etc -RRB- and paid only minimum premiums to keep the policy going , you may receive notification that you need to pay a large sum in premium to keep the insurance in force . This occurs when a policy is underfunded or in other words , the policy owner did not pay enough premiums in to the policy over time and it can not sustain the cost to pay out the death benefit .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
On average $ 10-15 per month , however , that doesnt even indicate how much it might cost you . Your location , loss experience and policy limits could vary a great deal from average . The better question is , How much can you pay in damages if someone is hurt in your unit , or if everything goes up in smoke , how will you get the money to start over ?
The average cost of auto insurance per year is going to vary from state to state and more specifically , person to person . Almost all -LRB- if not all -RRB- insurance companies look at an individuals credit score , among other factors , to determine their ` insurance score ' . If you have a lower insurance score , your premium will be lower and visa versa . It 's very difficult to determine the average without factoring in credit , state , year-make-model of car , how much you drive , and your experience level among a host of other attributes . The state of Oklahoma for example is on average , much higher than the state of Missouri . One of the biggest reasons is due to natural risk , or geographic risk . IE ... more storms in Oklahoma Vs. Missouri . I 'm sure a simple google search would provide an average vs all states and credit scores . Although I would be skeptical of that number generated due to all the variances that determine the price .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
How does a variable life policy work ? The portions of the premium that do n't pay expenses or cost of insurance go into the accumulation account within the policy . From this accumulation account the insured chooses different mutual fund investments within the insurance policy . These choices have the potential to preform better than average , average or below average . Great care must be had when deciding on a variable life policy . These are not simply buy and put in a drawer plans . Variable Life policies require review and readjustment/allocation over time . If you do not plan on paying attention to this type of policy , do not choose it .
To figure out how much life insurance you need with kids , you can make a little worksheet . Put down how much your family spends on average each year , and subtract your spouse 's salary from that . The difference is what you need to cover . Multiple it by how many years until your children are adults . Throw in extra for college . That is how much life insurance you may want to purchase .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Much Does Auto Insurance Cost Per Year ?
The cost of auto insurance will vary based on many factors . Such as driving record , geographic area , marital status , type of coverage , credit rating , just to name a few . I have seen policies as low as $ 30/mo for liability only coverage to hundreds of dollars . Contact your local agent and they will be able to provide with the coverages that are available in your area and the pricing for them .
`` Life insurance per unit '' is the cost of life insurance per thousand dollars of coverage . Child Riders are priced per unit . E.g. a $ 10,000 child rider may cost $ 60 per year , or $ 6.00 per unit . Flat extras are also charged by unit . The insurance company may add on $ 7.50 per unit of life insurance for 3 years after having surgery for prostate cancer . For a $ 100,000 policy , that would add on $ 750 per year , but then the flat extra would drop off after three years and the policy would cost $ 750 less . You can also price your own policy if you know the cost of one unit of life insurance . E.g. . If you are buying a final expense policy that costs $ 50 per unit , a $ 10,000 policy will cost $ 500 per year .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When looking at the average cost of Medicare Part C a person should consider the monthly premium as well as the out of pocket costs throughout the year . In many states the premium for a Medicare Part C -LRB- or Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- can be $ 0 per month to $ 50 per month . However , the max out of pocket costs can be as much as $ 6,700 per year . You will also want to make sure you are happy with the network of doctors and hospitals that are available to you . Going to a provider outside of the network can cost you a lot more . You may also need to get a referral before seeing a specialist . In contrast , those that have a Medicare Supplement Plan have a monthly premium but have far less out of pocket costs throughout the year . There is also no network which means you can see any doctor or hospital you like . You also do not need to worry about getting a referral for a specialist . The benefits of a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- can not change from year to year . An independent agent will be able to help get you all the information so that you can decide which is better for your specific situation . For more information about Medicare visit our website .
You can have two auto policies but not on the same car . I have many clients that own small business and they have a business auto policy and a personal auto policy which then gives them a multi policy discount on the personal auto and cost them much less per auto and the business auto they use the insurance premium as a business expense on their taxes .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
On Employer sponsored group plans the minimum cost is 50 % of the group rate of the employees , which is usually the median rate of the employees added together . But , the employer can elect to pay more than 50 % , just no less of the employees premiums . Ex . you have 5 employees that have an underwritten group rate of $ 200 per month per employee , or $ 2,400 per year x 5 employees = $ 12,000 x 50 % , which is $ 6,000 per year . But , this does not include coverage for dependents or the tax implications . That is just the bottom line dollar cost , before any adjustments , and does not take into account the type of insurance coverage selected . There are several ways to get employee coverage , this example of a group plan is just the most common .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Auto coverage will vary slightly depending on your state . However auto insurance is typically broken down into the following coverages : Liability Bodily Injury - Pays to cover the medical expenses of the damaged party -LRB- typically another driver and their passengers -RRB- if you cause an accident . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . There is a limit per person and an aggregate limit per accident . Liability Physical Damage - Pays to cover damage to vehicles or other physical property -LRB- mailbox , guardrail , traffic signal , etc. -RRB- caused by the insured -LRB- you -RRB- . This pays up to the limit listed on the policy . Uninsured Motorist Liability & Uninsured Motorist Physical Damage - This coverage protects the insured against motorists without insurance or with insufficient limits to cover medical and physical damages to the insured . This pays up to the per person and aggregate limits listed on the policy . Collision - Pays the cost to repair/replace your vehicle if you hit something/someone minus the deductible listed on your policy . Note that if your vehicle is a total loss then you will be compensated based on the actual cash value of your vehicle which is the value of your vehicle considering depreciation . Other Than Collision -LRB- Comprehensive -RRB- - This coverage pays to repair/replace your vehicle for theft , vandalism , hail , damage by animals , etc minus the deductible on your policy . If your vehicle is a total loss it will be valued on an actual cash value basis . Personal Injury Protection - Pays for medical/disability expenses of the insured for an injury occurring in or around your vehicle up to the limit listed on the policy . Accidental Death & Dismemberment - Small life insurance component often added to auto policies that will pay a death benefit if you die or are permanently disabled in an auto accident . Towing/Roadside Assistance - Varies significantly by company and state Rental Coverage - Covers the cost of a rental vehicle for the time that your vehicle is in the shop due to a covered loss . There are multiple levels and this coverage may not cover the full cost of the rental .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
The yearly deductible for Medicare Part B in 2013 for most people is $ 147 per year . For those with higher incomes , the yearly deductible is as follows for a single person . Above $ 85,000 to $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per year Above $ 107,000 to $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per year Above $ 160,000 to $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per year Above $ 214,000 - $ 335.70 per year
You can find stripped down Renters Insurance policies for as little as $ 50.00 per year from any local agent if you have good credit . Most people spend about $ 150.00 per year on Renters Insurance as they find value in some of the optional endorsements , such as personal property replacement cost -LRB- which allows you to buy new items without a deduction for depreciation if you have a claim -RRB- . Most of my customers add identity theft insurance to their policies so they can file a claim if they are the victim of identity theft . It will help restore incorrect info and pay attorney fees and some time off of work . In short , a basic policy wo n't cost much , but for a few extra dollars per month you can get much better coverage . What state are you in ? I may be able to help you . Send me an email !
Unlike many people think , most appraisals include market value and not replacement cost . For instance , a property in Detroit may cost $ 1 on the market , but the replacement cost of the house will be something like $ 200 per square foot . Every insurance agent who offers HO policy should have access to a special professional tool . Using this tool you can submit your property info , such as quality grade -LRB- economy , standard , premium , designer , custom -RRB- . Economy grade cabinets are , for instance , counted as $ 75 per cabinet , and custom may cost you as much as $ 500 per cabinet , or even more . So using this tool you can estimate the replacement cost of your property .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Where Can I Get Individual Health Insurance ?
You can get individual health insurance through an independent health insurance agent . They will be able to run quotes for you from all the major carriers and help match a plan to meet your needs . You can also get individual health insurance on our website . If you are under 65 you can click on `` other '' to compare plans instantly . If you are 65 or over and have Medicare , you can run a Medicare supplement quote on our website also . You can also give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
With the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- that became effective January 1 , 2014 , the differences in what group and individual health insurance cover are virtually nonexistent . The removal of underwriting , pre-existing condition exclusions and/or limitations and the addition of guaranteed issue and maternity coverage to both policy types has furthered leveled the playing field between group health and individual health insurance products . The crucial advantage group health plans continue to enjoy versus their individual market counterparts are tax issue related . What an employer contributes towards the health insurance coverage of their employees is a deductible business expense and in some small group cases may even qualify for a tax credit . In addition , employees can pay for their share of group health premiums using pre-tax dollars under a Section 125 Plan . Pre-tax treatment of employee contributions not only saves employee 's money , it reduces net taxable payroll which in turn lowers employer FICA matching expenses which is a further tax savings . For most individuals who purchase and pay for individual health insurance on their own there are none of these associated tax benefits . That is not to say that some individuals can not structure their business affairs to get some tax advantages in the individual marketplace but , after the ACA , our system is now set up to continue to tax favor group policies versus individual policies and to tax favor individual health insurance policies via subsidies up to certain income levels up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- .
Not much really . On an individual life policy there is n't an issue of portability as the individual owns the policy and the policy goes where ever the individual goes . With a group policy , there usually is a provision that allows an individual the opportunity to `` convert '' their group policy to an individual policy and have it become their personal property . Where this may be important is if the individual has serious health conditions and the carve out of an individual plan out of the group plan makes sense in terms of cost or even availability .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
This is a very important question , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace after January 1 , 2014 . Individual insurance carriers have revamped their products significantly to compete in this new environment and the consumer needs to be well informed when making their choice as the answer to your question will vary significantly from one insurance carrier 's products to another 's . As a general rule of thumb , you can be pretty comfortable that in a life threatening emergency your insurance coverage will apply outside of your home state . Where things can get confusing and possibly expensive is when a subscriber seeks non-emergency care outside of their home state or perhaps even outside of their plan 's service area within their home state . Before enrolling in a plan you need to know if it has moved to an HMO type of model where you may have little or no coverage outside of your plan 's service area -LRB- this could literally be an area encompassing several counties within your state -RRB- , whether the plan has gone to a gatekeeper model where a referral from your primary care physician is required for treatment to be covered at in-network levels , or whether your chosen carrier uses an open network model where you can access their provider network any where in the nation without a referral being required . My advice is to seek out the guidance of an experienced health insurance broker who understands how different health insurance carriers have structured their products and who can educate and guide you to the plan that best fits your needs . Please feel free to contact me for assistance in this regard .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
According to an analysis released in March of 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level -LRB- 70 % actuarial value coverage -RRB- individual health insurance plan is $ 328 . This is where the `` and your results may vary '' disclaimer comes in . Individual health insurance costs vary significantly from one state to another and can vary significantly within different areas of any given state . The costs will vary from one health insurance carrier to another and they will definitely vary from one level of coverage to another -LRB- Bronze , Silver , Gold or Platinum levels -RRB- . Taking all the factors I just listed into account , your age and whether or not you use tobacco products will be the determining factors in determining the gross cost of an individual health insurance policy for you specifically . Finally , whether or not you fall into an income range that may qualify you for an advanced premium tax subsidy if you purchase health insurance through your state 's health insurance marketplace or HealthCare.gov will determine what your final net cost of individual health insurance will be .
Of course you can , it 's called paying for it yourself . And actually that 's how most Americans paid for their health care -LRB- such as it was -RRB- for most of our nation 's history . Of course today most Americans have grown up in an environment where all of their health care financing has been funneled through a third party such as a health insurance company or a government program and have been disconnected from the concept of directly paying for health care services . Many would argue this is one of the underlying causes of the problems our nation is experiencing with health care costs today . Your doctor would be thrilled to be paid in cash , check or credit card for your office visit and not have to file a claim with an insurance carrier or government agency . In fact , you might find out you would get a discounted charge for paying in cash . An example of this is the growing `` concierge medical practice '' movement where people prepay their physician a fee for access to the doctor 's services . You get your phone calls returned promptly and when you go in to see your doctor he actually spends more than 5 to 10-minutes with you . What a revolutionary idea ! The hospital ca n't turn you away when you have an emergency and must deliver care . However , this does n't relieve you of the financial responsibility for the services you receive and they will bill you and pursue payment . This is obviously the area where the greatest concern for individual health financial risk management comes up . Unless you are very wealthy , self-financing several years of cancer treatment or paying for a heart transplant is out of the question for most people . Even managing a chronic health problem like diabetes , COPD , or psoriatic arthritis can have the person using medications costing hundreds or thousands of dollars per month . So , yes , you can still get medical treatment without health insurance and for many routine health care needs self-financing would probably be more cost effective . However , for the high risk and chronic health conditions a person may be faced with insurance is really a necessity .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Do you need private disability if I have group disability ? Depends . If you have group first , individual -LRB- private -RRB- disability will be limited as most plans only allow 60-70 % income replacement from all sources . Group usually covers 50-60 % of income . It will also most likely be taxable income so you have to decide how long you can get by on anywhere from 35-50 % of your total income . Where individual disability would step in is to fill that income gap . This is the reason I answered `` depends '' . It is what do you want , what the contracts actually say and what you can afford ? One thing to consider if you are new to the workplace is to get your individual disability first . You can protect 100 % of your income or even greater if your individual is in place before group .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Individual health insurance , per the requirements of the Affordable Care Act after January 1 , 2014 , is sold on a community rated basis . This is a much different method than has been used by the majority of states and so while it would have been difficult to answer your question in the past it 's virtually impossible now . You are simply going to have to get some quotes . Factors such as your state of residence -LRB- and where you reside within a state -RRB- , your and any covered dependents dates of birth , the number of covered dependents under 21 and the number over age 21 , the tobacco use status of you and/or any covered dependents , are all factors applied when calculating an individual health insurance rate . Obviously , these factors are unique for each person 's situation , that 's why no one can just say `` it will be $ 500 per month '' . You can do some online searches , you can go to the websites of health insurance carriers , you can even go to Healthcare.gov to get some ideas of what different plans , from different carriers , with different provider networks , and vastly differing rules will cost you and cover . And you may figure out correctly if you would qualify for any subsidy in the government marketplaces . Or , you can look health up a qualified health insurance broker , tell them your information and what you are looking for in general terms and they will do all the work for you , explain the subtle and not-so-subtle differences between different individual health insurance carriers , and help you make an informed decision . All for the same price as doing it yourself . For help please feel free to visit my web site .
YES , in the aggregate sense . Perhaps for some individuals or groups their particular situation will allow them to benefit from the changes in rating methods and benefits required by the Affordable Care Act . But for most individuals and groups I am entirely comfortable in predicting higher health insurance costs . First of all , the underlying cost of health care services continues to rise . As these costs rise the cost of insuring these services must rise accordingly , this has been the case throughout my 30 years in the health insurance industry . Secondly , we are beginning to get a picture of what the enrollment composition in the individual health insurance marketplaces is looking like . As predicted by many industry professionals , the enrollment is skewing towards an older and sicker population with the highly desired young and healthy population largely remaining on the sidelines . Just today one of nation 's largest pharmacy management companies reported their preliminary analysis of the prescription utilization of marketplace enrollees vs their pre-health care reform population . Usage of expensive prescription medications for serious chronic health problems is 47 % higher , and this is just based on a couple of months of utilization data ! While some hold out the hope that the people who waited until the last moment to enroll were disproportionately young and healthy , my own experience enrolling people gives little indication that this was the case . So , the table has been set for adverse selection -LRB- more sick than healthy enrollees -RRB- in the health insurance pool , especially for the insurance carriers who elected to participate in the government health insurance marketplaces . This can not help but translate into higher health insurance costs for 2015 and in many areas of the country this will translate into very significant double digit increases in individual and small group health insurance . This has already been broadly hinted at by all the major health insurance carriers , it 's really not a question of `` if '' but just `` how much '' .
Health insurance issuers -LRB- i.e. , licensed entities -RRB- in the individual and small group markets must consider all enrollees in all non-grandfathered health plans issued in a particular state to be members of a single risk pool when developing rates and premiums for plan years -LRB- in the individual market , policy years -RRB- effective on or after Jan. 1 , 2014 . Each issuer must have one individual market pool and one small group market pool in each applicable state . States may choose to require issuers merge these pools . The final rule also requires : Each issuer in a state will have an index rate for each of the individual and small group pools for each plan year -LRB- policy year , in the individual market -RRB- . The index rate is based on the total combined claims costs for providing essential health benefits within the single risk pool . If there is not enough claims data available , issuers may use any reasonable source of claims data , including claims from grandfathered business . There may be market-wide adjustments for risk adjustment and reinsurance programs as well as Exchange user fees . Premium rates for a particular plan may vary from the market-wide index rate only by several enumerated factors . For example , issuers may modify the market-wide index rate at the individual plan level to adjust for administrative costs -LRB- other than Exchange user fees -RRB- , so long as actuarially justified . Plan-specific adjustments to the market-wide index rate must not reflect differences in health status or risk selection . Issuers are expected to use pooled allowable claims data as a basis for calculating the plan-specific actuarial value instead of using the HHS actuarial value calculator . Fair Health Insurance Premiums -LRB- applies to non-grandfathered plans -RRB- - Health insurance issuers may vary the premium rate charged to a specific non-grandfathered individual or small group from the rate established for that particular plan only based on the following factors : family size -LRB- individual or family -RRB- , geography -LRB- rating area -RRB- , age -LRB- within a ratio of 3:1 for adults -RRB- and tobacco use -LRB- within a ratio of 1.5:1 -RRB- .
The answer to your question will vary depending upon the health insurance company you are enrolling with , whether your coverage is through an employer or is individual health insurance , and increasingly with the time of year you are enrolling . If you are enrolling through your employer 's plan then it is reasonable to expect that it will take 5 to 10 business days for you to receive your new member packet with your physical ID card . Many group health insurance carriers have the functionality through their web sites for your HR person or for you to be able to print out a temporary ID card within 24 to 48 hours of their receiving and processing your enrollment form . For persons taking out individual health insurance it is usually around 10 business days after receiving your application that your new member kit with your ID card will be mailed to you . Some individual carriers also provide for the production of temporary ID cards from their web site after your enrollment form has been processed . When an individual is enrolling in individual health insurance during the annual open enrollment period you should understand that our nation has now gone to a system that forces people to enroll in a prescribed time period each year . Millions of people are being processed during this period and it strains the capacity of even the largest health insurance companies to process this volume of enrollments that are coming from both the government based health insurance marketplaces and from direct enrollments . While the process should get better with time , the first year 's open enrollment left much to be desired from an efficiency standpoint and the consumer should be prepared for longer waiting times to get their ID cards following open enrollment . In 2014 waiting times of well over a month were not uncommon and in some instances the waiting periods some people experienced were even longer .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can A Sole Proprietor Deduct Health Insurance Premiums ?
Yes providing that the sole proprietor is not eligible to participate in a group health insurance plan . Eligibility is determined on a month to month basis . What this means is , if you are a sole proprietor with a spouse who is employed and has access to group health insurance , you are NOT able to deduct health insurance premiums paid on a plan purchased in lieu of the employers group coverage . This holds true for all months that your spouse is employed and is eligible to participate in the plan . Another example of ineligibility would be a sole proprietor who also has a part or full time job where group health insurance benefits are available from that job .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
Yes providing that the sole proprietor is not eligible to participate in a group health insurance plan . Eligibility is determined on a month to month basis . What this means is , if you are a sole proprietor with a spouse who is employed and has access to group health insurance , you are NOT able to deduct health insurance premiums paid on a plan purchased in lieu of the employers group coverage . This holds true for all months that your spouse is employed and is eligible to participate in the plan . Another example of ineligibility would be a sole proprietor who also has a part or full time job where group health insurance benefits are available from that job .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
A sole proprietor or partner can not deduct the premiums for life insurance on the owner or partner . You shouldnt want to deduct the premiums . You want to receive death benefits income tax free . If your business is a corporation , the corporation can deduct the premiums just the same way they can deduct any payment made to you as either salary or benefits , but the corporation can not have any ownership rights . You would then pay personal income tax on the premiums paid by the corporation .
In Canada a `` Sole Proprietor '' often refers to a business owner who is not incorporated . If that is the case then there is no `` going concern '' business to sell only the assets of the business -LRB- Loss of good will . -RRB- If the business is incorporated , the shareholder can sell the company and benefit from the capital gains exemption . Whether or not a sole proprietor should incorporate is something that should be discussed with his or her professional advisors . Business owners face additional challenges when planning for retirement because often the business is not only their source of revenue it is their greatest asset . A Retirement Planning Checklist and additional information on retirement and business succession planning can be found at www.jpw.ca . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Yes a sole proprietor can deduct disability insurance premiums from income for income tax purposes . If you choose to do this , it 's important to keep in mind that the benefits paid by the policy if on claim will be received as taxable income and you will need to pay income taxes on the benefits received . If instead you choose not to deduct the premiums , then the benefits can be received income tax free .
Disability Insurance premiums , if paid by the `` employer '' -LRB- and in this case you as the self employed -RRB- , would create a TAXABLE benefit to the insured should a claim occur . But because you are a Self Employed Individual , Individual disability income insurance premiums paid by a Sole Proprietor are not deductible , and the benefits received are tax-free . If you would like to see an insurance company answer to your question , click on the following link for Mass Mutual 's overview : WEBSITELINK
The funding source of paying disability claims depends on who is backing up the promise to do so . 1 . Social Security DI is funded by tax-payers 2 . State-sponsored DI -LRB- if available -RRB- is usually funded by employers within that state . -LRB- A sole-proprietor that constitutes a company of one person may be able to `` opt in '' to the program with special enrollment . -RRB- 3 . Individual - or corporate-owned DI is funded by an insurance company that collects premiums from the individual or corporation to form a `` pool '' of money from which claims are paid . In any of these cases , the funding source must have sufficient funds in the pool to pay out legitimate claims as they are submitted . Premiums reflect the justified cost of maintaining that fund at the proper level . Therefore , claims may require a company to submit an application to the State Department of Insurance for increasing premiumsfora specified `` block of business '' within which claims will - or already have - exceeded premiums coming in for that block . -LRB- An individual can not be singled out for premium increases . -RRB- If one owns a policy that is `` non-cancelable '' , that term means that the carrier can not increase premiums for any reason over the life of the policy .
Keogh plans are retirement plans for self-employed individuals , sole proprietors , partners in a partnership and employees are either . Keogh plans can be defined contribution or defined benefits plans . If the Keogh plan covers one participant the contribution limit is 25 % of compensation capped at $ 51,000 .
Each business owner needs to determine which retirement plan is suitable for their organization . If the sole proprietor is also the only employee , with limited contributions an IRA may suffice . But if an IRA contribution is too low , an SEP IRA may be a better option . For employers who have several employees , a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- may serve the organization by offering such a plan as an employee recruiting and retention tool .
Although there are thousands of sole proprietors in the U.S. , there are many businesses that have one or more partners . Creating a business buy out succession plan includes indemnifying the partners against the death or disability of one or more partners to protect the future of any business . The partners perform a business evaluation and assign the ownership share to each partner . If a disability occurs with one party or more the buyout provisions of the agreement are initiated .
If you are starting a business you will either need buy/sell life insurance for a partnership or key man life insurance for sole proprietor . Start ups can be tricky . You must calculate the capital infusion and sales if any . You may need a third party audit to place a value on your business . Once you have that number , that should be near your face amount or in partnerships valued equally divided by the percentage of ownership . You may want to save money and start off with a 10 year term and repurchase in a couple of years once annual sales are established . Good luck and congratulations !
The best person to answer this question would be your tax professional such as a CPA . Information you may want to provide them would include the following : * is the car leased or owned * how is the car used -LRB- business , personal , business & personal -RRB- * what type of business -LRB- sole proprietor , LLC , S corporation , partnership , etc -RRB- * is the car covered on a personal or business policy * how it the car registered and titled Understanding if , when , and how a car as well as its costs such as insurance can be written off is probably good to know before you buy or lease your next vehicle so you can put all the pieces in place appropriately . Great question !
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement.The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back.If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you.With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay.The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA.Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap .
Lawyers generally purchase a Business Owner Policy or BOP to protect their office from liability claims arising from operating an office . A BOP is appropriate for a sole proprietor or small partnership law firm . If the lawyer office is multiple states and multiples cities with complex property values and lease requirements , it is more likely to be insured with a CPP or Commercial Package Policy . No matter if its a BOP or CPP , the same exclusion applies to the general liability section of both policies . It reads as follows `` We '' do not pay for `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' arising out of the rendering or the failure to render a professional service . A lawyer 's work is a professional service . Accordingly , claims arising out of those professional services will not be covered . To plug this gaping hole in your insurance , you need a Lawyer Professional Liability Policy . The cost of Lawyer Professional Liability Insurance can vary widely based on your location , your areas of practice , the number of attorneys covered and the number of years youve purchased malpractice insurance . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
If you own a business and your business form is a C Corporation , if you pay your LTC premiums through your business , 100 % of the premium paid will be tax deductible . If you are an S Corp. , LLC , Partnership or Sole Owner , a portion of the premium may still be tax deductible to you .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Globe Life Insurance Work ?
Globe Life Insurance issues policies that often have very very low initial payments . Often , they are for children . Since the risk of death is low , they are able to issue these plans . A full-time broker is a great resource for comparing these types of plans and offering perhaps additional affordable alternatives .
I could not find any indication that Globe Life is associated with CMFG , but called Globe Life to confirm . Their representative said that if your policy is with Globe Life , your statement should say Globe Life . It may be that you have a policy with `` globe '' in the product title , or got your policy through Global Credit Union ?
That is a great question ! Globe Life is a subsidiary of Torchmark , A Fortune 500 financial services company . they were originally Liberty National Insurance company until 1980 when they acquired Globe Life , and formed the torchmark holding company . My best guess would be that they have a portion of that company that handles their banking , that most likely goes through CUNA , -LRB- Credit Union National Association -RRB- , the marketing group for your mysterious CMFG -LRB- CUNA became CMFG in 2012 -RRB- . Or CMFG bought a part of Globe 's life business , which is a fairly common practice - The big financial companies buy/sell blocks of mortgages and other investments that may include life insurance policies in order to earn more money themselves . It may be that the CMFG people -LRB- who sell services to credit unions and consumers -RRB- bought a chunk of Globes business , with yours in it . I 'd call Globe , or drop them an email to their customer service people and ask them why , and make sure you know who owns your policy , so you know who to contact/collect from . It can be very confusing when high finance starts swapping assets , and we little folk try to keep track ... I had a mortgage that was sold 4 times that I know of ! Good luck , I would n't worry too much , just be sure . Thanks for asking !
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company was rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . This company , like every life insurance company , has their niche . Globe Life 's niche is doing policies online and through the mail . While handy , they do not allow people to get as much life insurance as they might want , and going through medical underwriting can save many people money vs buying No Exam coverage online . Whether Globe Life Insurance is good for you depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay .
As Peggy stated above , if your Globe policy is a whole life policy and has grown some cash value the you should be able to borrow against it . However I would advise you to first find out what the interest rate is and if Globe uses `` direct recognition '' regarding policy loans . Because Globe is a stock company therefore the policy holders do not enjoy the sharing of dividends as with a mutual company . So you may be better off taking a loan from a bank if you ca get a low interest loan . For more on how `` Direct Recognition '' affects a policy loan and why it is imperative that you know their policy before taking a loan , please see the article here : WEBSITELINK
Per Globe Life 's website , Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Touchmark Corporation , which is a holding company that specializes in life and supplemental health insurance , and has its main office in McKinney , TX . Globe Life 's home office is located in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma .
If you have a Globe Whole Life insurance policy that has accumulated cash value beyond any surrender charges or outstanding loans , you will most likely be able to cash it in . Call Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company at 972-540-6542 with your policy number to talk to a representative and see if you are able to cash in your Globe Life insurance policy .
Do you mean Globe Life ? Globe Life is a life insurance company that offers final expense , accident , and mortgage protection insurance . They are certainly a legitimate insurer that focuses more on middle and working class families to offer them smaller insurance policies to meet financial obligations these people generally do not have the money on hand to meet .
The price of Globe Life Insurance depends on the type of policy you purchase , your age , gender , and other factors . So it is impossible to state a dollar amount for Globe Life Insurance . While the company offers some good rates , their choices for coverage are not too extensive . So you may want to contact Globe to see what rate you can get , then compare it with other companies using the quote engines provided on many websites .
Global Life Insurance is a reference to Globe Life Insurance . Globe is a company that sells life insurance online and through the mail . While popular with those who want smaller policies with little effort , it may not work for those who want larger policies or who want to shop for the lowest price .
Globe Life Insurance , well known for its $ 1 advertisement for the first month 's premium , is an A + rated carrier . As such , they are financially strong . My issue with Globe is in the small print . The level premium increases every 5 years making it virtually impossible for the insured 's to keep a policy at older ages . Most everyone I speak with about Globe was unaware of this important feature . Buyer beware !
If your Globe Life Insurance policy is Whole Life , as many are , you should be able to borrow money from it . You will need to wait until you have paid in long enough to have money built up in the policy to borrow from . Calling Globe and asking for a current illustration should be able to show you how much there is for you to borrow .
Globe life insurance markets term life insurance , whole life insurance , accidental death insurance , mortgage protection plans , and medicare supplements . Two versions of the whole life policies do build up cash value that you can borrow against . The Children 's whole life policy is called `` The Young American Plan '' and there is a Whole Life policy that adults can purchase . The face amounts of Globe policies are pretty low so if you are looking for policies to accumulate cash , there are better options available .
Globe life insurance is an A + rated life insurance company that has been around since 1951 . Globe offers term insurance , whole life insurance and children 's insurance . They have a deal where you pay $ 1 for the first month and then your premium is based on your age at the time of issue .
That is an excellent question , and one that took some work to find for you ! The initials CMFG stand for CUNA Mutual Financial Group , according to the very nice operator I spoke with . CMFG is the parent company of CUNA , which is the parent company of Globe Life , where your policy was written . Globe will still pay you out when your claim is filed , but your monthly check is going to the parent company 's bank account . While things normally will roll downhill , apparently their premium payments roll uphill first ! I hope that sets your mind at ease , they seem like a solid company , and if they are all as good as that operator was , you 're in good hands . Have an awesome day , and thank you for asking !
Per their website , you can borrow money from a Globe Life Insurance policy . The policy must be Whole Life that you have had long enough to build up a cash value . You can take out a policy loan to borrow against the cash value that has built up in your Globe Whole Life policy .
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company began in 1951 in Oklahoma City Oklahoma and is a subsidiary of Torchmark Corporation . The company has more than 66 billion in force . In 1972 , Globe Life created Employee Services Division to service the Government organizations . It is one of the largest direct to consumer insurance companies in the U.S. .
An insurance carrier is only as good as their rating . Globe Life in my opinion is a quality carrier for three reasons : 1 -RRB- over 50 years old 2 -RRB- A + credit rating 3 -RRB- Over $ 60 bil of life insurance in force The bottom-line is people buy it and have been buying it for a long time . They have to be doing something right to keep satisfied clients paying their premiums . For free real-time life insurance quotes through Globe and other carriers please visit : www.clminsure.com or call me directly at 561-320-2978
If your Globe Life Insurance policy has net cash value after subtracting surrender charges and fees , you could cash it in just as you can any other Whole Life policy . Before doing so , you should talk to a Globe agent to see what other options your policy has , and to make sure you are making the correct choice in cashing it in .
I do not know , however , companies occasionally voluntarily sell blocks of business to other companies . That could be the reason . CUNA Mutual Life insurance company might have bought some policies from Globe . Another possibility is that your state insurance commissioner could have directed the sale of some or all of the Globe business in your state for one of several reasons . It would be good for you to determine who is actually responsible to pay the death benefit . Your agent should be able to help you but a call to the help desk at either life insurance company should resolve the issue .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Homeowners Insurance CoverA Retaining Wall ?
HO-3 homeowner policies have coverage for `` adjacent sturcture '' . The question is how is this wall constructed and how does it influence the coverages of the policy . Is it a `` retaining wall '' designed to protect the house in some fashion ? When the home is first insured the company will send an inspector to view the property . If that `` retaining wall '' is interfering with the safety of the home they will refuse to cover the property .
Normally retaining walls are not included as part of the standard coverages in a homeowners policy . Your homeowners policy was designed to protect your home so that you have a place to live . It was n't designed to protect things that are n't part of the building . Now , there are optional coverages that some companies will offer and there may be coverage for a retaining wall in certain situations . It really depends upon your specific policy and what happened to the wall . Coverage is usually triggered by a specific event that is sudden and accidental . Settling of the wall is not a sudden occurrence and would n't normally be covered . However , if your wall is damaged by a storm or a fire , there may be coverage . Find an agent you can trust and they can help you figure out the best way to protect your property .
Normally retaining walls are not included as part of the standard coverages in a homeowners policy . Your homeowners policy was designed to protect your home so that you have a place to live . It was n't designed to protect things that are n't part of the building . Now , there are optional coverages that some companies will offer and there may be coverage for a retaining wall in certain situations . It really depends upon your specific policy and what happened to the wall . Coverage is usually triggered by a specific event that is sudden and accidental . Settling of the wall is not a sudden occurrence and would n't normally be covered . However , if your wall is damaged by a storm or a fire , there may be coverage . Find an agent you can trust and they can help you figure out the best way to protect your property .
HO-3 homeowner policies have coverage for `` adjacent sturcture '' . The question is how is this wall constructed and how does it influence the coverages of the policy . Is it a `` retaining wall '' designed to protect the house in some fashion ? When the home is first insured the company will send an inspector to view the property . If that `` retaining wall '' is interfering with the safety of the home they will refuse to cover the property .
It is unlikely . It is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your particular policy of course . The policy does cover `` other structures '' on your property such as sheds , fences etc. retaining wall by it 's nature is build into the earth , however so the greatest potentai hazard that might cause damage to it is earth movement which is excluded in your policy . This is much the same situation with a patio or your driveway as each of those are also build directly into the earth . Now , that having been said , should any of these be damaged as a result of a negligent act of someone else , like a contractor whom you may have on your property working for you , there may be coverage under their commercial liability policy .
There are a few ways to obtain so called `` GAP '' insurance for your car . If you lease the car , in many cases , the dealership builds this coverae into the leasing agreement . It would be important to talk with your Insurance Professional about this as well , however , if your plans are to lease , because in many cases , this coverage can be included in your auto insurance policy and probably for less cost than the same coverage built into your lease agreement .
Children can be covered under a family plan but the parents have to be on those plans . Some states offer coverae for children but there must be a financial or economic reason for the childs inclusion . The best way to cover children with health insurance is to place insurance on the parents or legal guardians and extend it to the chidren .
That is a great question ! A `` rider '' in insurance lingo , is a clause that is attached to the body of the original policy . It `` rides '' along on it . Some life insurance policies will allow for the addition of a term insurance policy as a rider to covera spouse 's or children 's life insurance needs . The applicants life insurance policy will now -LRB- for an additional cost -RRB- insure their life , plus the person/s named in the rider -LRB- for however long the rider is in force -RRB- . Accidental death and dismemberment policies are popular riders also . Need more info ? Feel free to drop me a line , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Whole Life Insurance is not bad . It depends on who you are talking to and why they are saying that . WHole life provides a service . It gives a client a steady , non chaning premium each month ; it can last till age 100 ; it builds cash flow . It is what is called permanent coverae . Unlike term insurance , it doesnt change as you get older . Whole life is also very useful in providing key man insurance -LRB- insurance a company buys on top performers -RRB- and for those who may want to pay on their policies for a few years and then end up with a paid up policy . There can be many benefits to owning a whole life policy . Sadly there have been those in the marketplace selling and pushing only term insurance . Statistically people do better saving money as they pay their premiums on their insurance instead of `` investing the difference '' The onlyway to see which policy works in your bet interest is to meet with an agent who is not trying to sell you insurance ; rather meet with an agent who is working to provide you with the best insurance option for your particular situation and life goals ; you will be very happy you did !
The best way to buy anything -LRB- including Insurance -RRB- is to know what you want before you start looking . You should sit down and discuss your insurance needs with a professional so that you can identify exactly what you need . A young man who is single in his 20 's has a different insurance need than a young man of 35 with a stay at home wife and 2 small children . What you dont want is to be sold a policy that doesnt address what your needs and wants are -LRB- do you want a lot of coverae for the least amount of money or do you want to build cash value in your policy -RRB- . Take the time upfront to identify your needs and then you can choose the best plan for your family based on amount , price and coverages .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Homeowner insurance works much in the same way as it does a home . The condo policy covers all furniture fixtures and walls below the roof and within the exterior walls . The only primary difference is the percentage of ownership of the roof , outside walls , separate structures . There is special insurance for a condominium . Keith Prim - Dallas - 214-435-0791
To answer this question , I will assume that it is posed to determine if a homeowner policy will cover any type of damage to an air conditioner , absent any other facts . The homeowner policy is definitely not a maintenance policy and therefore will not pay for damage to the unit , unless it is damaged by the occurrence of some other type of covered peril . For example , if it is a relatively expensive ` window unit ' and a heavy picture falls off of the wall , striking and severely damaging the ac unit , there could be coverage , subject to the application of the homeowner policy deductible . In reality , you should think twice about the future premium increase ramifications of submitting a smallish claim of this nature . You would , in a situation of this nature , check with your agent to make sure it is worth submitting . If it is a central ac unit and is damaged by a fire in the garage caused by a carelessly laid cigar , there would be coverage , again subject to the deductible . The financial loss for a central ac unit would no doubt be much more extensive that for a window unit and might therefore merit claim submission . Also , the fire described would probably have damaged the walls , ceiling , possibly stored objects , etc. , and produced smoke damage to other parts of a house , if attached , justifying submission of a broader claim for damages , including those to the ac unit .
Sure you can . The Roth is just another way the government and Wall Street can get control of some of your wealth . The Roth has limits where other financial instruments do not , like cash value whole life insurance . You can only contribute $ 5,500 a year to a Roth if you make less than $ 181,000 a year if you 're married and less than $ 114,000 if you are single . The government and Wall Street are in the business of confiscating your wealth from you and diverting it towards their coffers . The more you defer , postpone and separate yourself from your income , the more fees and commissions Wall Street gets to collect .
More than likely not . I am not sure which type of association you are referring to : condo versus homeowners . If it is a condo association , then part of your association fees will go towards the master policy . The master policy covers the building from the walls out and common areas . It is rare that association fees will go towards an individual unit condo policy -LRB- HO-6 -RRB- . If it is a homeowners association , then the fees go towards the board , common area maintenance and insurance for the common areas . All home owners are required to purchase their own homeowners policy -LRB- HO-3 -RRB- . I hope this helps .
Yes and no ! The typical multi-peril homeowners policy water covers damage caused by rain under specific circumstances such as water windblown thru the roof shingles or a hole in the wall or roof caused by lightning . However if it rains to the degree that water collects on the ground and enter your home thru doors or windows , the homeowners policy does not cover it . That would require a flood insurance policy . If it rains and your sump pump fails and water fills your basement , most homeowners policies will NOT cover the loss , though many companies offers optional sump pump failure coverage . Consult your insurance professional for the details that apply in your state .
How about today ? There are many creative ways to fund your life insurance policy . Lets suppose you have term insurance with 10 years left on the premium guarantee . You could , of course , just keep paying the premium for those 10 years . If the carrier doesnt get those 10 years of premium payments , you will lose the coverage . Is there any way you could stop paying but still retain the guarantee ? Yes , there is . You might be able to use a single premium immediate annuity to fund the policy . Make one payment into the annuity , and the annuity will , in turn , pay your insurance premium for you . Depending on your age and other factors , the amount of money you put into that annuity could very well be substantially less than the total premium you would end up paying for the next 10 years . This way you could stop making premium payments after that one annuity contribution , but still retain your guaranteed coverage . Now lets suppose you have a universal life policy . I am sure you know that this is a flexible premium product . You could overpay , underpay , and even stop paying . Of course , you need to know what you are doing here to make sure you will have the coverage you need for as long as you need it . Given that , you might be able to plop one lump sum into that policy now and never have to make another payment and still get the guarantees you want . All you need is for the carrier to do a simple calculation and illustration for you . Here again , you could stop making payments but still retain the coverage . There are many ways to skin a cat , as they say . Not that I think cats should be skinned at all - but you know what I mean :-RRB-
There is a special form of homeowners insurance for condo owners . Most mortgage companies require that you have a condo form policy to protect their interests in the property . Unlike a standard Homeowners policy , the condo form does not cover exterior walls and the grounds as these are covered by an association policy .
A renters policy is cheaper for the same amount of coverage on personal property . A homeowners covers not only the personal property but the residence itself . That is why it is more expensive . For your information a Condo policy is a combination of a homeowners and tenants because they are not responsible for the grounds and outer walls of the building .
No , Condo Owner 's Insurance is not included in your fees . Generally -LRB- refer to your master association document -RRB- the Association would insure from the wall studs out -LRB- siding , insulation , roof -RRB- and will carry liability to cover the association . You need to insure from the wall studs in . That includes sheetrock , trim , cabinets , carpet , personal property and your own liability risk . Condo insurance is not very expensive since most claims happen on the outside of the building -LRB- wind and hail -RRB- . A specific area to look at is weather or not your heating and cooling equipment is covered by the assocation , or if you need to insure it .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Gerber Life Insurance Legitimate ?
Gerber Life is a `` legitimate '' life insurance company in that it is domiciled in the state of NY and is located at 1311 Mamaroneck Ave. , White Plains , NY , 10605 , 914272-4000 , and is licensed to do business in all 50 states and Canada . They list six product groups on their website , WEBSITELINK , includingthe onlyendowment life policy that is also an adult life insurance policy . It 's called the Gerber Life College Plan and has been their flagship policy for a long time . They are definitely a niche carrier , targeting the parent and grandparent market . Their contracts have many guaranteed features that appeal to those that do n't want to take any chances that their insurance might lapse or diminish in value over time . I have worked with their service teams on a few occasions and they are knowledgeable and very customer-oriented . The have been rated `` A '' , AM Best 's third-highest financial rating , and `` A - '' by Weiss , which is their 3rd best rating as well . Both of those ratings are within the `` Excellent '' range of both rating services . That gives them a Comdex of `` 80 '' , which means that 80 % of all financially-rated carriers are ranked below them . If by `` legitimate '' you are referring to their contracts being of real value , or if can you trust a life insurance company that is also a baby food company , you may want to do more research . From and industry point of view , they are legitimate .
Gerber Life is a `` legitimate '' life insurance company in that it is domiciled in the state of NY and is located at 1311 Mamaroneck Ave. , White Plains , NY , 10605 , 914272-4000 , and is licensed to do business in all 50 states and Canada . They list six product groups on their website , WEBSITELINK , includingthe onlyendowment life policy that is also an adult life insurance policy . It 's called the Gerber Life College Plan and has been their flagship policy for a long time . They are definitely a niche carrier , targeting the parent and grandparent market . Their contracts have many guaranteed features that appeal to those that do n't want to take any chances that their insurance might lapse or diminish in value over time . I have worked with their service teams on a few occasions and they are knowledgeable and very customer-oriented . The have been rated `` A '' , AM Best 's third-highest financial rating , and `` A - '' by Weiss , which is their 3rd best rating as well . Both of those ratings are within the `` Excellent '' range of both rating services . That gives them a Comdex of `` 80 '' , which means that 80 % of all financially-rated carriers are ranked below them . If by `` legitimate '' you are referring to their contracts being of real value , or if can you trust a life insurance company that is also a baby food company , you may want to do more research . From and industry point of view , they are legitimate .
Gerber life insurance is life insurance provided by Gerber Life Insurance Company . A company headquartered in White Plains , NY and established in 1967 . It is a financially separate entity from the Gerber Products Company , with the same mission - `` help parents raise happy , healthy children '' . Gerber life insurance offers both term life insurance and whole life insurance . They even have signature products that include term or whole life . The Gerber Life Insurance Company currently has a single A rating from A.M. Best , which is consider ` Excellent ' . A.M. Best provides impartial reporting by rating insurance company management , integrity , and financial stability .
Gerber Life Insurance Company is a competitive company when it comes to insuring children . And in fact , for older adults who have medical issues preventing them from getting Life Insurance elsewhere , Gerber is one of the options to consider . Gerber has been around for a long time providing insurance for children . Gerber is one of the many companies we represent as well . Hope this answers your question .
Gerber Life Insurance comes in the basic types of Term and Permanent , which are the types of life insurance that are offered by most life insurance companies . In that respect , getting Gerber Life Insurance , or any life insurance , is usually a good idea . To determine whether Gerber 's life insurance is best for you , compare prices and features with similar policies . If purchasing Whole Life , it is a good idea to talk to an agent so that you understand all the features and variables of each policy .
Gerber Life Insurance Company carries a number of different types of life insurance plans . Therefore , the cost will vary depending on the type of policy , as well as the age of the applicant . You can go to the Gerber Life website to get a quote for the plan that you choose . Keep in mind that there are other No Exam life insurance policies that can be compared to Gerber 's prices to be sure that you are getting the best deal .
You can cancel your Gerber life insurance policy by contacting Gerber Life Insurance Company 's customer service center . They can be reached by phone at their toll free phone number of 1-800-704-2180 . Or you can mail them at Gerber Life Insurance Co , 445 State St , Michigan , 49412 to request the cancellation .
I find Gerber 's prices to be a good deal for children . Gerber also has a guaranteed issue policy that can come in handy for those who do not qualify for other policies . To compare rates of any of the Gerber plans or policies with other life insurance companies , you can go to a website that offers a variety of companies and input your state , date of birth , height , weight , tobacco status , and some medical information . While price is n't everything , it is nice to compare before making a decision .
We carry Gerber , and find that it is very competitive for children and for older adults who are unable to qualify for other policies . Their guaranteed issue life insurance is especially reasonable for that type of coverage if you choose to pay it monthly by automatic withdrawal from your checking account . As with other guaranteed issue policies , there is a graded period where the policy only pays for accidental death , then after two years it will pay the full death benefit for death by any reason . If death occurs in the first two years , it pays back all premiums plus 10 % , which is a better sure return than you can get anywhere else . Where the guaranteed issue Gerber policy might not be worth it is if the insured person lives so long that the policy pays less than the premiums paid in . However , this type of policy is usually purchased by those for whom life expectancy may be shortened due to illness or weight . In my opinion , the risk of not having any coverage would be worse than the choice to purchase a Gerber policy and not need it until many years later .
Gerber Whole Life Insurance , per their website , if offered to persons age 18-65 and in face amounts of $ 25,000 to $ 150,000 . Gerber also uses Whole Life in their Grow-Up Plan . Whole Life insurance is permanent insurance that has cash value . To determine the best Whole Life insurance for you , contact an agent that offers a variety of Whole Life policies to compare features and projected cash values .
For all but their Accident Protection Plan , Gerber Life Insurance covers death by any reason . Life insurance excludes death by suicide during the first two years , and if there is misrepresentation on the application and death occurs during the first two years , there is a chance the policy may not pay the death benefit . Aside from those situations , Gerber life insurance covers death due to natural and accidental causes , as does all traditional life insurance .
Gerber has Whole Life insurance policies for babies to senior ciitizens . Most are under $ 100,000 . Some -LRB- for persons over age 50 -RRB- are guaranteed issued policies . You can get a quote directly from the Gerber website or contact an agency like ours for a quote for guaranteed issue life insurance .
Gerber life insurance company began in 1967 and is rated A -LRB- excellent -RRB- rating by A.M.Best , a third party watchdog agency . Gerber has 40 million in force with 3 million customers and 2 billion in assets under management . It is a small niche carrier in the life insurance market place .
Gerber Life Insurance is an A rated carrier that sells both term and permanent coverage . The Gerber name is well know for baby food and because of that , they have a name in the marketplace that suggests family , safety , etc. . Other than that they are generally involved in the lower tiers of life insurance coverage , and do much of their business through the mail . They also offer several plans that do not require an exam .
Gerber Life is one of the many insurance companies that offers life insurance benefits - they were rated `` A '' by A.M. Best . They feature a great guaranteed-issue whole life insurance program -LRB- GIWL -RRB- for people between ages 50-80 - there are no health questions and no exam required for the program . The program features a `` graded '' death benefit - in short , a two-year waiting period before the program will pay a death benefit -LRB- unless death occurs under accidental means in the first 2 years , in which the policy will pay the full benefit -RRB- . That 's just an overview of one product that they offer . Gerber offers a wide range of products to fit various needs for individuals .
Your question can mean many things . Gerber has an `` A '' rating by A.M.Best , the company most recognized by the life insurance industry . Gerber 's products are generally at the lower end of need for most people as they mainly sell final expense type products . Premiums are generally competitive , and a good independent agent will guide you to the best value for your needs .
The cost of disability insurance is dependent on gender , age , smoking status and health condition . The first step is to determine your legitimate earnings to establish your compensation . Then you have an important decision to make : pay the premium after tax for a tax free benefit of up to 60 % of your compensation or pay the premium pretax for a taxable benefit up to 80 % of your compensation , provided that you have ability to use the premium as a legitimate business deduction . Depending upon your gender , age , nonsmoking status and good health condition you should be ready to pay 5 to 8 % of your compensation .
The first step is to determine your legitimate earnings to establish your compensation . Then you have an important decision to make : pay the premium after tax for a tax free benefit of up to 60 % of your compensation or pay the premium pretax for a taxable benefit up to 80 % of your compensation , provided that you have ability to use the premium as a legitimate business deduction . Depending upon your gender , age , nonsmoking status and good health condition you should be ready to pay 5 to 8 % of your compensation .
Self-employed people need to verify income . Generally , the disability insurance company is looking for two years of tax returns , bank net worth statements from loan applications and sometimes bank account records that establish revenue . The first step is to determine your legitimate earnings to establish your compensation . Then you have an important decision to make : pay the premium after tax for a tax free benefit of up to 60 % of your compensation or pay the premium pretax for a taxable benefit up to 80 % of your compensation , provided that you have ability to use the premium as a legitimate business deduction . Depending upon your gender , age , nonsmoking status and good health condition you should be ready to pay 5 to 8 % of your compensation .
Disability insurance is extremely important . The street vernacular calls disability insurance paycheck protection . With most Americans have less than 90 days of reserve cash for expenses , it important to buy as to the maximum limits . The first step is to determine your legitimate earnings to establish your compensation . Then you have an important decision to make : pay the premium after tax for a tax free benefit of up to 60 % of your compensation or pay the premium pretax for a taxable benefit up to 80 % of your compensation , provided that you have ability to use the premium as a legitimate business deduction . Depending upon your gender , age , nonsmoking status and good health condition you should be ready to pay 5 to 8 % of your compensation .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Does Life Insurance Have Cash Value ?
Permanent life insurance has the potential to accumulate cash values based on the performance of the crediting method and policy expenses . With few exceptions , most permanent guaranteed universal life insurance can be used as a supplemental retirement income plan ; if the policy is designed to minimize the cost of insurance ad comply with TAMRA . Generally , the policy expenses are deducted from the premium . Whatever is left of the premium is invested in the crediting method : interest rates or indices . Separate sub account performance may credit earnings or debit losses .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
Yes , cash value life insurance can work as an investment . That said , comparing the returns of the stock market to a life insurance policy is sort of a fools errand . Why ? RISK . Risk is the thing that keeps people up at night , worried about their investments panning out or not . When you consider cash value life as part of your financial plan , you are choosing a conservative , low return , very low risk choice . This may free you up to be more aggressive in other investment options as your cash values become a fall back or `` if I screw up elsewhere , I 've still got this '' investment . Will cash values provide stock market returns while maintaining the relative safety ? Nope . Stock Market returns require taking Stock Market risks . The up and down of a portfolio . Cash Value life will in most cases continue to move upward over time slowly moving upward . While that does n't sound exciting , a few years back when the market slapped everybody back ten years , my cash values continued to grow as they do n't go backwards . Something to think about as you plan for your life . Cash value plans provide if you do n't come home and they provide if you do come home .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When talking about cash value in life insurance policies it is important to differentiate between the policy value and the surrender value . For example , in a universal life insurance policy the policy value -LRB- or fund value -RRB- would be the accumulated cash value which is earning interest . However , almost all universal life insurance policies have a decreasing surrender charge schedule . This means that if you were to surrender the policy in the early years the surrender charge could reduce most -LRB- or all -RRB- of the value you receive . The value you would receive is called the net surrender value , because it is net of all charges . At some point , say 10 or 20 years down the road , the surrender charges will go away and the policy value will equal the net surrender value . This is part of the reason why cash value life insurance should always be looked at as a long term proposition .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
No , Term life insurance does not usually have a cash surrender value . Term insurance buys pure protection rather than building up a cash value , and that is why the costs of Term life insurance is usually lower than policies that have cash value . Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- Term is one type of Term that could have a cash surrender value if you kept the policy long enough .
Whole life insurance is life insurance that includes a cash value build up in the policy that reduces the financial obligation to the company . In other words , the client is self-funding the death benefit by a portion of the premium going to the cash value . As the cash value grows the less the company has to contribute to the face amount of the policy . The difference between the face amount of the policy and the cash values is the actual amount that the company pays upon the death of the policy holder . For a cash value policy to be paid-up the cash value build up has to reach a point where it equals the face amount of the policy . This increased funding of the cash value is why paid-up policies are much more expensive than standard whole life policies . As a financial professional , I only recommend term insurance to my clients that gives them 2-3 times the protection needed while building assets through debt reduction and investments in 401ks , IRAs and mutual funds . Keeping your investments separate from your insurance is the financially sound thing to do . If you have any questions please contact me @ 843-450-9879 or visit my website @ www.hinchfinancialgroup.com .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Why buy Cash Value Life ? Why not ? Cash value life insurance provides a tax favored pot of money that the insured can use at their choice . This pot of money inside your policy can be called upon in times of need to provide funds for emergencies , education expenses and really , anything you want . The best part of that is you do n't have to ask permission , you do n't have to explain your need to that guy in the cubicle that looks down his nose at you to decide if you 're worthy . You just call and it 's wired to your account , no questions asked and you use it for what you want . For some people who understand , that aspect alone is very liberating . And it 's been that way a long while . JC Penny , the actual JC Penny , used the cash values in his life insurance to help pay his payroll and keep his stores open during the great depression . There are other valuable aspects about cash value life I could detail but I 'll stick to this one for now . I 'll bring up another positive on another post .
There are two main types of life insurance . The first is term life insurance which has no cash value . Think of it as renting . The second type of life insurance is cash value life insurance . The most popular go by names like , whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . All of which have cash value that builds with time . If you have one of these types of plans , look for the pages marked `` illustrations '' . You will find a cash value column explaining how much cash is built up in a given year . Most policies allow you to take a `` cash loan '' against them and keep your coverage in force . You may also cash out completely or roll the cash value to another plan . You will find the average policy will not have cash value until coverage has been in force for about 5 years .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
The cash value is the portion of whole life insurance that has built up so far in your cash account . Think of it like money in the bank . The way whole-life is designed , it has a level premium for the length of the policy or until it is paid off . What 's really happening is as the cash account grows , the actual insured amount reduces by the same amount . You become more and more self-insured each year . If you buy $ 100,000 whole-life policy , in the begining your insured amount is $ 100,000 and your cash value is zero . Many years later your cash value is $ 40,000 and the insured amount is $ 60,000 for a total death benefit of $ 100,000 . Several more years later your cash value is $ 90,000 and the Insured amount is $ 10,000 for a death benefit of $ 100,000 If you live to age that the policy endows -LRB- usually age 95 or 100 on older policies and age 121 on newer ones -RRB- the cash value is $ 100,000 and the insured amount is zero . You are now self insured . You can use the cash value while you are living by taking policy loans which are actually loans against the cash build up in your policy not actually withdrawals from the policy or you can cash surrender the policy and walk away with the cash . If you have a participating policy that pays dividends , you can have additional cash value and death benefit build up from that .
Each company is different . Most will specify exactly what the loan value of your policy is . You can check on your last annual statement or , if you want up to date information , the company can give you a current statement . Most times , the loan value is less than the cash value . The other thing you must be aware of is that taking loans does have some consequences . First , you wo n't be earning as much return on the cash value . There is an interest rate within the policy that will erode the cash value if you do n't pay it back . Secondly , any outstanding loans will be subtracted from the death benefit . So , be careful about taking a loan from your policy . I know there are strategies that use the cash value in a life insurance policy to finance other purchases and , if done properly , can be a good thing . Just be sure you 're doing it in the correct way and be aware of the consequences before you take the loan . Talk it over with your agent so you know exactly how you 'll be impacted . That 's why it 's so important to have an agent that you know and trust .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
Why is Whole Life insurance good ? Ah - where to begin ? There are so many good things about Whole Life ! I like the points Larry made above here , and the points that DM Rozek made . So rather than restate those points I 'll start by saying that your best Whole Life policies are with the strongest , oldest , Mutual insurance companies that pay dividends to the policy holders . There is no cash value at all with Term insurance so that 's a definite advantage of Whole Life . Beyond the other points mentioned above by the other contributors , what I like to help my clients understand is the `` infinite banking '' uses , or the `` interest arbitrage '' strategies that Whole Life insurance makes possible . The cash value of Whole Life is a liquid asset that can be used without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . The interest on policy loans is almost always lower than the interest and dividends paid into policy cash value . And when you have a policy with a mutual company that offers non-direct recognition loans your cash value continues to accumulate compounded as though the loan was never taken . And when borrowing from your cash value yo are n't locked into a repayment schedule as you are with a bank .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Watches ?
A watch would be considered personal property . A renters policy covers personal property . There is an internal limit to the recovery available on a watch . Please check with your policy or the agent to determine the amount of coverage you have available . The settlement will be reduced by the deductible on the policy .
Let me add one point . Theft and Mysterious disappearance are two separate things . So talk with your agent . Theft coverage will respond if there is evidence of a theft . For example a broken door lock or other evidence that someone gained access to your premises . The broader coverage available from some carriers can include mysterious disappearance which is basically that the insured item is not where you believed it to be and therefore has been possibly stolen or you simply do not understand how it disappeared . Mysterious disappearance is generally more expensive than theft , and is generally purchased in-connection with protecting valuable articles of jewelry , watches and furs or other property that have their own sub limits in a homeowners or renters policy . Read the policy relative to how jewelry , watches and fine arts are protected and if it does not sound like enough coverage talk to your agent .
A watch would be considered personal property . A renters policy covers personal property . There is an internal limit to the recovery available on a watch . Please check with your policy or the agent to determine the amount of coverage you have available . The settlement will be reduced by the deductible on the policy .
What to watch out for when purchasing long term care insurance ? Will `` everything '' work as an answer ? What I have found in my sales of long term care insurance is that it is a long process where we review the multiple options a good Long Term Care policy presents . There are so many buttons and nobs on a policy that you should n't overlook any as you figure out your plan . LTC is really one of the most `` customizable '' insurance policies I have ever run across . So what to watch for ? make sure to tweak every `` button and nob '' a policy offers before you settle on your plan . See what each twist and change does to your plan and price .
If you watch Suzie 's show , she does n't recommend buying whole-life insurance but if someone already has it she often recommends keeping it or using the cash value when they are in financial trouble . Often their whole-life policy bails them out of trouble . Suzie is a big believer in term life insurance when you are young -LRB- just in case -RRB- and no life insurance when you get older . Suzie is entertaining and you can learn some things watching her show . But no one should use generic advice from a TV show , Radio program or even a book as an end all solution for you . Everyone has different goals , needs and different levels of wealth .
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
Great question ! The damage should be covered , but if it costs less to fix it than your deductible is , you may be better off not filing a claim . For example , let 's say the damage to repair your window is $ 200 . Your deductible is $ 500 . Your insurance is only going to pay anything over the $ 500 mark , so you will end up paying for the window regardless . It may not make sense to file a claim , pay for the window yourself , and then watch your rate go up . If you have renters insurance , and the car was in your apartment parking lot , there may be coverage there , depending upon the terms of your renters insurance . If you did not file a police report , I 'd recommend that you do , it will help you if you ever need documentation of damage and help collect on your claim . If you need help , feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
That is a great question ! Yes , universal life insurance is a type of whole life insurance , but at the same time , it 's really kind of not . The best way to explain it is that it is a whole life body welded to a term chassis . Just as term policies end after a certain amount of time , the average ul policy will too , if you 're not watchful . The average ul policy is only guaranteed for twenty years , and can end sooner , or last longer , depending upon it 's investment performance , and the amount of premiums that you pay into it . If properly funded and maintained , it can last your lifetime ; if you do n't watch for how well it 's funded , it can eat its cash value to stay active , and at some point lapse . Confusing ? Yup , this is n't a policy for people that are n't wanting to have to pay attention to it , possibly have to increase their premium payments , or who want the safety of not having to worry if they can lose the policy if they make the same payments over a length of time . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! I really wish that I had more information about you and your situation to be able to give you a better answer , but here 's what I can tell you . What does your retirement look like to you ? Travel , relocation , stay at home and watch tv ? What does your current financial situation look like ? Have you started saving for retirement ? How much can you safely sock away each month ? If you want to live at the standard that you are now , you should have 8-10x your current salary put away . I 'd also advise you to look for a long term care plan , or investments that help protect against an illness or injury that would require skilled care . Please inbox me with more detail , and I 'll give you some better advice , ok ? I hope this helped , thanks for asking !
Your homeowners insurance will cover your wedding ring if the value of the ring does not exceed the amount of insurance you have for jewelry watches and furs in your homeowners policy . For most people the base amount of insurance is $ 2500 . If the value of your wedding ring exceeds that , you should contact your agent and get your policy amended to a higher value . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
That is a great question ! With the over fifty attempted repeal tries , and the very public stances against it that the Republican party has , you are certainly right to wonder . But for all of the bluster and rhetoric , here 's what the reality is - the American public does like the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , as the uninsured rate is the lowest it 's been in decades . The Supreme Court decisions gives the Law solid legal footing . With an election looming , and still stinging from what most in the Republican party thought was going to be a slam-dunk win 4 years ago on a platform of repealing the Act , I think that the wiser leaders of the party know they need to rethink that strategy . As much as they dislike it , the voting electorate does like it , and sadly , many rely on the subsidies to be able to afford their coverage . The adding of Medicaid has progressed slowly but surely , even in the Red States that had spoken out against it , as leaders realize that after the nearly 2 decades of economic pressure , the average American needs the assistance . Even as there seems to be a to tendency to disregard facts in politics , when it comes down to where the votes are coming from , there can be softening or complete reversals of what had been very public stands on issues like health care.With the polling numbers falling solidly in favor of the Act , and the Law being upheld twice in the Supreme Court , I 'd suspect you will hear less talk of repealing the Act . That said , I 'm certain that each candidate will have an opinion on how he or she will change the Law to improve what does n't work as well as it could . There is intense pressure from the insurance companies to regain the incredible profits they were making , and other medical companies also would like to push their agenda 's , so the parts of the law that kept prices low I 'd expect to see attacked . So in short , repealed ? No . Changed ? Probably , depending upon the outcome of the election , and how the public responds to the proposed changes . A great question , and one we in the industry have been watching closely also . Thanks for asking !
The trick to this is getting quotes that are comparable.There are so many more nuances in Homeowners coverages than on auto . So start out with what coverages you have now . Start with the amount of insurance on Coverage A of your policy . Does this really reflect the replacement cost of your property ? Now look at the ancillary coverages : Do you have water/sewer back up ? Does the limit include both dwelling and contents or only one or the other . Do you have Law and Ordinance Coverage what is the percentage ? What about personal injury coverage ? Do you have a schedule or need specific coverage on jewelry , watches or furs or similar expensive items limited in the existing policy by a dollar value ? If so what is it ? Do you need special circumstantial coverage for a home based business , ? Do you have home Warranty Coverage ? Do you have Earthquake coverage ? Is it constrained by a per cent deductible ? If so what is it ? I think you will get the picture . then I would suggest you give an independent agency a call or visit their website . We would be glad to help you , but perhaps you are not in the Atlanta area and want some local contact . We understand that but our recommendation to an independent agent is still sound advice as they typically will have multiple companies to compare .
From me , of course . If you are like most Americans shopping for health insurance is not only about as exciting as watching paint dry but you also find yourself in a world you do n't fully understand and where the people seem to speak a foreign language . Of course , you can always go online and shop around or , even more fun , go to HealthCare.Gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace and shop there . That works for some people but millions of others have learned the painful lesson that there are a lot of factors to consider when making a purchase as important as health insurance that are very difficult to present concisely on a web site . Seek out the services of a qualified life and health insurance agent . An independent agent not tied to one specific insurance company can shop the entire marketplace for you and can be impartial . An agent with additional professional certifications such as Chartered Benefits Consultant , Certified Employee Benefits Consultant , Registered Health Underwriter are examples of professionals who have taken their education and training beyond the simple requirements to get a life and health insurance license . These are the characteristics I would recommend you look for in a health insurance agent . It does n't cost you anything extra to get these professional 's services and they do all the work , can answer your questions , and point out those not so obvious issues with provider networks , how your specific medical and/or prescription needs are covered by different plans that the average consumer often misses or does n't even know to ask about . ObamaCare has not made all health insurance policies equal , quite the opposite in fact . Ask your friends or co-workers , do an Internet search for health insurance agents , or contact me . But you 'll be glad that you got professional guidance on this matter .
South Dakota Home Insurance rates are heavily affected by Hail and Wind . In the last four years every major city in the state has been hit by hail storms , some of them multiple times ! The # I have been given is that if you took every dollar of property insurance premium paid in to insurance companies in 2008 , 2009 , 2010 , 2011 and 2012 the insurance companies have paid out about $ 1.40 in claims for every $ 1.00 in premium . This has lead to rate increases , tightened underwriting , and some companies have left the state -LRB- stopped selling insurance here -RRB- . As an individual , the best things you can do are : 1 . Watch your credit . Insurance rates are based somewhat on your credit information . The better credit you have the lower your rates will be . 2 . Keep a high deductible . Insurance companies want to be there for you when you have a major claim , but they want you to handle the small stuff . Many people are changing to $ 2,500 deductibles . 3 . Use impact resistant materials . The company I work for -LRB- American Family Insurance -RRB- offers a large discount for impact resistant shingles and certain steel roofs . There are other discounts for cement board siding -LRB- versus vinyl since it does n't hold up well to hail -RRB- . Send me an email if you would like a quote !
There are a number of features I look for in home insurance coverage but my main objective is to have a balanced insurance program . Usually homeowners also own vehicles , have some form of health insurance , life insurance and even disability insurance . Home insurance should be consistent with other coverage you purchase . And it is not a bad idea to combine coverage with the same insurer whenever possible . Its better to deal with someone you already know if you trust them than a stranger simply trying to sell you something . I like to see all-risk * coverage on your home and your personal property . Most policies provide only limited coverage on personal property . I like insuring agreements that say , Any accidental direct damage is covered unless specifically excluded or limited . An insurance policy is easier to understand if you know what you are not covered for . Perils like flood , wind , earthquake and sinkholes may deserve special consideration in certain areas . Id also watch for limitations on certain property like jewelry and silver . I like to see guaranteed replacement cost coverage on the structure and replacement cost on personal property . Deductibles and liability limits should be consistent with those you purchase on your cars .
That all depends on what you are needing to cover . The maximum amount I know of is $ 500k . First , I would look at covering lost income while you are out . Second , what expenses would you like not to worry about like your mortgage , health insurance premium , credit card and automobile debt , unexpected or uncovered medical bills , are you going to need to fly in someone to watch the kids while you are at the hospital , etc. . Then the tough part , after getting the quote for what you are thinking you need , look at the premium as it relates to your budget . Is this amount affordable ? Adjust as necessary . AT least you will know where you stand and how you might need to preserve and spend the benefit .
Why is flexible life better than fixed premium life ? ONLY if it fits your needs and you maintain a close watch on your policy . There is no insurance policy that is better than the other . It will come down to what you need it for . How long do you want it ? What do you want it to do ? When you look at a purchase of an insurance policy you will find a wide range of policies and prices . The cheapest one to start may very well be the most expensive if you live too long . The most expensive to start with may actually turn out to be the cheapest if you live a long time . A flex premium policy will require more diligence from the consumer than a fixed premium plan . Skipping premiums or underfunding a flex plan can and often does lead to policies that self destruct over time . A fixed premium policy by it 's nature , is just a steady plan designed for consistent regular premiums . A flex policy gives the owner a lot more freedom , but in most cases , not the best idea . In other words flex policies have more risk than a fixed premium plan .
There are many life insurance industry statistics that can help answer this question . But sometimes the life insurance industry is too close to the data to create objectivity . One of the large consumer watch dog services is J.D. Power & Associates . Here are a couple of observations from last years publication . Life insurance ownership has steadily declined over the last 20 years . Those who have life insurance are woefully under insured . 40 % of adult in the U.S. have no life insurance . Over 50 million Americans , who have insurance , have inadequate coverage .
If the vehicle you are renting is over 10,000 GVW -LRB- gross vehicle weight -RRB- most likely your insurance provider will not cover a U-Haul . If the U-Haul is under 10.000 GVW there may be coverage . The best advise is to call your local agent to answer this question as your agent would befamiliarwith the specificdetailsof your policy . In some cases there may be an endorsement for vehicles over 10,000 GVW . Just never assume a U-haul is like a rental car and watch those over hangs at gas stations .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Does Not Need Life Insurance ?
Great question ! Let 's look at this from a different angle . Why does anyone own life insurance ? People have life insurance to protect people they love care about or have some obligation to . It is really about a simple as that . Some examples would be a spouse or partner wanting to take care of a surviving spouse or partner . Another common use is to provide for children , grandchildren or even more distant future generations . That is truly what we consider life insurance to create a legacy . In somewhat less lovable terms comma we may need to secure life insurance to make good a business or personal promise to repay lenders . Another business use is to utilize the funds to help in succession planning for a business . If none of the above describe your situation you may not need life insurance . Some people view cash value life insurance as an investment aside from the death benefit but that is a whole different discussion ... and a source of great debate . Good luck !
I agree with the answers posted before this one , but let me suggest to you that perhaps the question `` Who does not need life insurance ? '' is the wrong question . From a financial planning perspective , I always address the `` life insurance question '' with my clients by looking at how having -LRB- or not having -RRB- a life insurance policy in force impacts their overall financial plans . I 'd say that close to 50 % of my clients might not need life insurance , but they very much want it because of what it does for them as a part of their overall financial planning .
Life insurance indemnifies financial liabilities . If a person had no financial liabilities , including final expenses funded by his or her own resources with no beneficiaries that would suffer economic loss , life insurance would be irrelevant . If a person had no charitable intentions nor was willing to make a difference in anyones life , then life insurance would be irrelevant . If a person had no need for tax advantaged income for supplemental retirement , life insurance would be irrelevant .
The person who will suffer no financial loss in the event of his/her death does not need life insurance . If you have sufficient assets to cover funeral expenses and take care of your family obligations insurance is not needed . Many wealthy people have insurance so they can keep their money instead of having to spend it .
If there wouldnt be any financial impact at the passing of a person , there isnt a need for life insurance . This is rare . The motivation to buy life insurance comes from a desire to treat those that you love with respect and to provide money to help them through the difficult transition brought about by your passing .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Those who need the greatest amount of life insurance are those who would have the greatest losses , numerically speaking , if they passed . Persons with very high incomes would need a very high amount of life insurance to replace their income in the event of their deaths . Owners of a highly valued business could purchase a very large policy to buy out the share of another owner who passes . A son could take out life insurance on his father so that he is able to purchase his father 's ranch when his father passes . Of course , needing a great amount of life insurance does not make the need any more important than for those who need lesser amounts . Sometimes $ 10,000 can mean as much to one beneficiary as $ 1,000,000 can mean to another .
Many people need life insurance . Studies show that many people know that they need life insurance . People who love someone else need life insurance to ease the pain of a premature death . People who owe money need life insurance to fulfill their obligations . People who are looking to the future need life insurance to protect their ability to obtain coverage . My favorite though , is wives need life insurance . They are so very important in a family and widowers have such a difficult time when they lose their wife .
That is a great question , and one that I am frequently asked . It 's easier to tell you who does n't need life insurance , than it is who does . There is a much smaller group who do n't . If you have a fund set aside that you will not need to touch during your lifetime for your funeral expenses and final debts , along with a funded plan to provide your equivalent yearly income for your survivors , you do n't need life insurance . Since the vast majority of Americans do n't fit that category , life insurance is probably a good idea . The idea behind the insurance is that you do not leave those behind as financially hurt by your passing as they are emotionally . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
The best life insurance is that which is in force at the death of the life insured . The issue is that term life insurance usually expires before the insured does . So , permanent forms of life insurance are preferred since they can not be outlived the way term usually does . In general , consider whether your protection needs are temporary or indefinite . Temporary or finite needs of less than 30 years can be met by term life insurance for periods such as 10 , 15 , 20 or 30 years . The coverage is surprisingly affordable -LRB- dollars per day -RRB- . When the policy expires , coverage ends . To prevent that , either consider permanent -LRB- cash value -RRB- life insurance now or in the near future to ensure you do not outlive your life insurance . Meet with a life insurance professional who can analyze your situation and recommend exactly what you need .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Life insurance can be used for many purposes : business succession , estate planning , charitable giving , key person coverage , etc. . Because it has so many great features , life insurance works well for many financial endeavors . But those who really need life insurance are those who have people who need them , who they would leave behind . Unless they have been able to save up hundreds of thousands of dollars in a short period of time , most people with spouses and/or children need life insurance .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
The people who need life insurance the most are the survivors . These are those who remain after you die . I assume that you love these people . While they dont need a life insurance policy , they need the money that the life insurance would have brought . They need basic necessities and they need time to recover from the shock of losing you . You dont need life insurance , they do .
Who `` needs '' life insurance coverage ? Anyone who has someone who would be financially adversely affected by their demise . That would include anyone upon whom the burden of final expenses would fall . This would also include creditors who would bear the unpaid balances on loans . A person who wants to leave a donation or legacy to a person or organization , but whose estate would fall short of the amount desired to be passed on would also fall into the category of one who needs life insurance coverage .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
I do n't think you can state whole life is actually better than term life insurance or term life insurance is better than whole life . It just depends on the need by you , the client . There are many different product options when it comes to life insurance . There is the right product for practically every situation . The true use of whole life is when there is a level premium need for life insurance your `` whole life '' hence the name . However , whole life insurance has become the Swiss Army knife of life insurance . The riders and cash value can be used for critical illness , terminal illness , children 's college funds to retirement benefits . There are now lots of uses for whole life insurance . Term life insurance is meant more to cover a need for a fixed amount of time . There are term limits that vary from annually to 5 years , 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , 25 years , 30 years and even 35 years . You may also set a premium on a universal life plan that does n't build cash value other than to level your premiums as far as age 151 years old . The main thing to consider which type of life insurance you need is to first identify your need for life insurance . A wise man once shared , you should buy life insurance like you will die tomorrow and invest like you will live forever . Find an experienced independent broker to help you identify your needs and shop the market for the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
No Medical Exam Life Insurance -LRB- also called No Exam Life Insurance , Nonmed Life Insurance , Simplified Life Insurance , Guaranteed Life Insurance , and other titles -RRB- is life insurance that does not require taking a paramed exam . More to the point , it does not require giving a blood sample , which is the part of the exam that some people want to avoid . No Medical Exam Life Insurance usually costs more than life insurance that does require an exam , for very healthy people . But for those who are overweight , get `` white coat syndrome '' -LRB- high blood pressure while having exams -RRB- , or have not had their cholesterol checked for years , foregoing an exam can result in very competitive rates . It is not unusual for someone to apply for a medically underwritten policy , get rated up for something they did not know they had , and end up paying more than the No Exam policy would have cost . Also , for those with serious health conditions , No Medical Exam Life Insurance is often the only type of life insurance available to them . Finally , many people like No Exam policies because they feel that the time spent in taking the exam and waiting for the underwriter to review their medical records -LRB- if the latter is needed -RRB- is not worth it . While it is not always an option , it is nice to have some No Medical Exam policies to choose from . Agents selling both types of coverage can help you discern which is best for you .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Buy Auto Insurance From Another State ?
I believe that you couldbuy auto insurance coverage from any agent or carrier that is in another state , but they must be licensed in your state that you are purchasing the coverage in . Whom ever that you purchase coverage from be licensed in the states that they sell coverage in so that they can provide you with the coverages necessary within your state .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
USAA is a very good and large insurer that operates as an auto insurer and as such may be higher or lower than a competitor . A few years ago my daughter moved from USAA to another independent agency company and was able to buy a renters policy , and auto policy and an umbrella all for less than her USAA auto policy . All auto insurance is regulated by individual states , so you can expect that an usurer can reflect its appetite for auto insurance in that state in its pricing . No company can be the least expensive in every state for every set of conditions . That is not a realistic expectation . You should be aware too that insurers often build elaborate rating algorithms which can produce several million price points across their business in a particular state . So your carrier may believe that a 16 year old with Corvette is not insurable to that carrier while another insurer might say the exposure is fine since they are exacting what they consider an adequate rate for the exposure .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
Renters Insurance can not be transferred from one tenant to another tenant ; the named insured can not transfer the insurance to another person . However , if the named insured moves to a new rental location , the location can be changed by request to the Carrier 's Customer Service department in writing or online -LRB- if available -RRB- . If the named insured is moving to another State , the policy will need to be rewritten as policy forms are approved separately by each independent State thus requiring a rewrite to the new State . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States should you be unable to make a change to your current renters insurance policy based on your current situation . An exemplary online solution for all ! WEBSITELINK Should you need additional assistance , please contact a licensed professional to answer your specific questions !
I am assuming your are referring to the `` Comprehensive '' coverage - also called Other Than Collision - found in an auto insurance policy . State Auto is what we call a `` Super '' regional carrier as they are not nationwide , but are in more than a couple regional states . While the basic structure of the auto policy contract is the same company wide , they do tweak their contract based on state laws and state performance ratios . That being said , generally speaking State Auto 's comp coverage would include things like - fire , theft , water damage , glass damage , break-ins and hitting an animal like a deer . Comprehensive claims are subject to the deductible listed on your policy . Give your local State Auto independent agent a call and discuss the specifics of your state and policy language .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
If you are considering term insurance please ask yourself these questions . How old am I ? If I buy 20 year term now how old will I be when I have to buy another policy ? Does it meet your needs to buy term life considering the objective of the policy ? The purpose of term has always been to allow the purchaser to invest the difference between the cost of term life and permanent coverage . How much are you `` investing '' now ? Every policy you have means you are paying `` administrative costs '' for that policy . What if you have one good size permanent policy purchased at your current age to meet all your life insurance needs or can you buy a term life and then be able to meet your financial objectives and not have to buy another life insurance policy ? Finally , you need to have a personal advisor that puts your needs first and has the integrity to make recommendations based on your TOTAL financial plan and not some life insurance agent pedaling life insurance
I think your question may be a bit different than perceived by the earlier respondent . Are you asking if you fly to another location and rent a car is that covered as a temporary vehicle or not and then if it is a temporary vehicle does your own insurance apply or do you need to buy liability coverage at the rental counter . If I understand the question correctly the answer is that it depends . You may have coverage as a temporary substitute vehicle to the extent that you have coverage on the vehicle you are substituting for . I would suggest you discuss this issue with your agent , so he can review what exactly you have coverage for . Keep in mind that auto insurance in the US is typically limited to the US and Canada not Mexico so when you travel to another country be sure to go over your itinerary with your agent . Some countries like Mexico do not recognize US insurance as being valid . If you get to the rental counter in another country and forgot to review things with your agent then do this . Buy at least the minimum liability coverage they have required of the locals .
An auto isnurance policy is made up of several different coverages which cover a variety of things . Keep in mind insurance is also State specific , so the specific coverages that make up an auto policy can vary from state to state . In my state -LRB- TN -RRB- , the typical policy is made up of ; Liability - pays to the injuries or others subject to your policy limits Property Damage - Pays to fix damaged property of other subject to your policy limits Medical Payments - paid to you or your passengers subject to the policy limits Uninsured/underinsured motorist - covers you if another does n't have any or enough insurance subject to policy limits Comprehensive - subject tothe policydeductible , covers things like fire , theft , water , glass or collision with an animal . Collision - subject to a policy deductible covers damage to your car when the accident is your fault . There are other coverages like rental car expence , towing , etc. that can be added to a policy . The above is a very brief overview . Check out WEBSITELINK for a pretty indepth explanation of an auto insurance policy . It is also best to speak with a local independent agent in your area and ask them about speciifcs for your state and your personal needs .
I am working on a case right now in which my client has applied for 11 policies . Here is the breakdown : He is a partner in one business with two other fellows . They have just completed a buy-sell agreement and are funding the agreement with life insurance . Per the advice of their accountant and their attorney , they are purchasing several policies to cover both the current and the anticipated future value of the business . One policy will be owned by the business , and four other policies will be owned by a trust . That gives us five policies so far . My client is also a partner in a second business , with another fellow . They are following the same funding strategy . That business will own one policy , and the trust will own an additional four . Our count is now up to 10 policies . But these policies take care only of business needs . My client is also married with children . He needs life insurance for family protection . So he is purchasing yet another policy for their benefit . That gives us 11 . The underwriter is fine with this set up . My client can justify the need for all policies financially . All policies have been deemed appropriate with regard to the financial needs of the business and the financial needs of his family . And you know what ? He could buy more if he wanted to . Lets suppose he supported a number of charities . They could be religious , or social service , or political . He could take out a separate policy for each of their benefit . Five charities , five more policies . But we have another consideration . What if his net worth is over $ 5 million , and he wants to preserve his estate for his heirs ? What if he wants to avoid forcing his family to liquidate his assets just to pay Uncle Sams estate tax bill ? He could buy life insurance to cover the tax bill . Another policy . We are not done yet :-RRB- . What if his parents were financially dependent on him . It happens . What if his premature demise would put them in financial straits ? He could buy life insurance on himself for their benefit , so they could be well taken care of . Do you realize that in this scenario , this one client could take out 20 or so policies ? And it would all be financially justified and appropriate . How do you like that ? Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
I believe that you couldbuy auto insurance coverage from any agent or carrier that is in another state , but they must be licensed in your state that you are purchasing the coverage in . Whom ever that you purchase coverage from be licensed in the states that they sell coverage in so that they can provide you with the coverages necessary within your state .
Health insurance is regulated by each state . Before you can buy a policy in Georgia -LRB- as an example -RRB- a carrier must file their policy form and rates with the state Dept. of Insurance and wait on approval . This is a long and costly process . About a year ago GA passed a law that allowed carriers to market products from other states in Georgia . So far not a single carrier has filed for approval to sell in Georgia . Despite what some people believe , even if you were able to buy coverage from another state the savings would be nominal , if anything at all .
Although you can not purchase a policy from another State than the one you live in , if you find yourself needing to move in the middle of a policy , you do not need to cancel the existing one and purchase a new one in the new State right away . All policies are valid regardless of the State you are driving in , so if you go on vacation , you do n't need to buy a new policy for every State you drive through . However , once you move out of one State and into another , you will need to purchase a policy in your new location . Typically the current insurance company will send you a Notice of Non-Renewal prior to the renewal of your existing policy . But until the policy comes up for renewal , you are able to keep the policy you have in place .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
The short answer is it depends upon the state . One of the most basic principles of insurance is a person/company must have an insurable interest in the property . In order to have an insurable interest in an automobile a person must have a valid drivers license and sometimes a registration . If a state allows an illegal immigrant to obtain a drivers license , then that person can obtain auto insurance . If the person can not obtain a drivers license from that state , he can not obtain auto insurance and even being behind wheel is illegal . Political debates aside , an illegal immigrant should find a state where he/she can register for a drivers license and get auto insurance . This not only benefits them because they will get property and liability coverage , but it will also benefit other drivers because it provides them something to recover from in the case of an accident .
Ideally changing your homeowners insurance from one carrier to another would be best on the anniversary date of the renewal of the policy . In other words , if the policy runs from 7/5/2014 - 7/5/2015 , ideally changing your policy on 7/5/2015 would be best . However , there a number of factors involved . As a licensed independent agent , I recommend reviewing your current coverage once a year with your agent to be sure you have the proper coverage . At times , carriers go through rate changes and it may be favorable to change to another carrier . Understand however , that when you change your home insurance , you should strongly consider changing you auto along with it to the same company . Most carriers offer substantial discounts for the multipolicy discount of having both home and auto coverage with the same carrier . The second reason it is best to change on your anniversary is most times your home insurance is rolled into your monthly mortgage amount through an escrow account . Whenever you do change carriers , the new carrier will have to be billed , the old carrier has to refund the escrow amount , and the new check forwarded to the new carrier . It is easiest and least confusion , if that is done at the annual period . With all that being said , if during the middle of the year you find it prudent to change your homeowner coverage to another carrier , it can be done , you just need to be aware and work with a knowledgeable agent to be sure the transition runs smoothly .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Are The Forms Of Homeowners Insurance Available To Homeowners ?
Homeowner 's insurance has many forms of coverage . A broad form is a basic policy that covers many perils for your home , other structures and personal property . But it is not as comprehensive as an `` all risk '' policy . A basic policy provides less coverage . There are also renter 's and condo policies for consumers that do n't own their home .
A company is formed under the laws of a state and under the direction of the insurance commissioner of that state to provide property insurance . There is a great deal that could be said about that process but the company is basically formed because there are many people who want protection should something untoward happen to their home . If these people knew each other they could form an association and provide for the losses of members of the association on either a pre-payment or as losses are incurred basis . This is the basis of fraternal insurance . These types of associations are getting a new life in the health insurance field . However , most of these people who want coverage dont know each other and it is therefore the function of the company to pool these risks . In the practical world there is an organization known as Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- that provides forms that a company can either use or modify . These forms comprise the coverages that the insurance company extends to the risk pool . The basic coverage is fire with wind and hail damage being the next most popular coverage . Since there are many things that are beyond the control of the homeowner and there is measurable information about potential loss , the company will add coverages that are desired . Using the ISO forms allows them to add coverages quickly and easily . There are some losses that the pooled risk doesnt want to accept . These are then made into exclusions by the insurance company . The most common exclusions are for earth movement -LRB- earthquake -RRB- and flood . Even though each year there are major losses to these risks , companies generally only provide that coverage if required . The flood risk is so great that a governmental program is available . These coverages are bound together with liability coverages and other coverages to form a package policy which the company normally calls a homeowners policy . The package is then made available to licensed and appointed agents and brokers in the state where you live . The insurance commissioner supervises the operations of these companies for the sole purpose of making sure that the companies can keep their promises . The brokers and agents then offer the policy to a prospective homeowner . Often there are optional coverages available . With these optional coverages the broker or agent can put together a plan that meets your needs and remains within your budget . The most important aspect of this process from the agent or brokers perspective is the selection of limits . Most insurance companies require an independent evaluation of the cost of rebuilding the residence . That figure is the limit of coverage that the company is likely to accept . This limit may have very little to do with the sale price . Because the policy is a package the limit on the residence determines other coverages on the basis of a formula . The personal property for example is a percentage of the residence coverage as are other coverages . If the personal property of the customer is greater than the limit stated in the normal policy additional coverage can be purchased from the insurance company . Most policies have internal limits on specific types of property , jewelry , furs , art , weapons etc. . Additional coverage for these items is normally available at an increased charge . This happens frequently with guns . Jewelry coverage is often available only when there is an appraised value available . The application for insurance is then underwritten . In this process the company reviews the property and determines if the property falls within the standards that were used when the rates were developed . Usually they are looking for things that would disqualify the residence such as aggressive animals , unfenced swimming pools , poor condition of the property , trampolines etc. . After the policy is underwritten it is then issued and paid . Then the company is obliged to pay for damage to the property from any of the perils mentioned up to the limits of the policy .
Homeowners Insurance is a form of Property Insurance . The Insurance Services Office publishes Insurance Forms which are basic coverage contracts sold asinsurance policies by insurance companies . Homeowners Insurance is the most common form of Property Insurance ; this form is generally written for Owner Occupied Single Family Homes but in some cases , it could apply to an Owner Occupied Duplex . To complicate matters further , mortgage companies do not differentiate the coverage form ; they simply define required insurance as ` Hazard Insurance ' ; the hazard being the risk or collateral against which the mortgage company has leant funds . If a single family home is owner occupied , a Homeowners Insurance Policy should be purchased ; if a 1 - 4 unit dwelling is tenant occupied , a Landlords Insurance Policy should be purchased . For residential apartments with 5 + units , a Commercial Form is required and in many cases can be written as a Residential Apartment Policy under a Business Owners Policy -LRB- BOP -RRB- package . For further clarification on the correct form of insurance , contact your insurance carrier or our office and we 'll be happy to answer any further questions .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Insurance companies offer homeowners ' insurance policies to people who own and occupy their residence . Once foreclosure occurs , you may occupy your residence but you no longer own it . If you are allowed to remain in the home for a period of time , you may be able to contact your insurer , explain the circumstances and have your policy amended to a Tenant Homeowner form . Tenant homeowner policies are issued to people who occupy a residence but do n't own it . The coverage is similar to homeowners ' insurance except it does n't cover the structure . It covers certain damage to your personal property , additional living expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and your have to live in temporary quarters while it is being repaired and certain personal liability exposures . You may need to adjust the amount of insurance on your personal property be consistent with what it would cost you to replace all your personal things . If you move to a rented home or apartment , you may be able to amend your homeowners ' policy to a Tenant Homeowners ' form and amend the address to that of your new residence .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Renters Insurance in the US is an outgrowth of the regular Homeowners Insurance policies that have been in use in many states since the mid 20th Century . In fact for many companies the forms in use continue to be variations -LRB- with appropriate state approvals -RRB- of forms developed by the Insurance Service Office , ISO . The Insurance Service Office is not alone in developing contractual homeowners and subsequently renters policy forms in use in the various states . There are other product development groups and larger companies often develop their own product offerings . With all that said , there are some common elements to homeowner and renters policy and by far the use of annual -LRB- 12 month terms predominates -RRB- . Decades ago there were companies using forms that lasted as much as three years for homeowners , but the reality of getting appropriate approvals from the regulators , responding to loss results and getting mortgage companies to accept the policies has all led to a fairly standardized approach in the US that homeowners and renters policies are primarily annual contracts . But do n't throw away all your old policies when you get to the end of a year if you are all aware of an event that might give rise to coverage during that time period . For example suppose during the term of your renters policy your dog bit a neighbor . That occurrence then would be associated with the payment of loss for the infliction of bodily injury even though the damage is only assessed completely for years to come . Her is why I mention dog bites . In many states you have absolute liability for your dog 's aggression . And , dogs who maul a victim are often attacking children -LRB- easier prey to the dog -RRB- and the damages are usually to the child 's head . Therefore as they age there can be a need for repeated surgeries to address the scaring . Since the renters policy is typically an occurrence policy , the policy which will respond is not the current insurer several years out , but the insurer at the time of the event or '' occurrence ''
Homeowners Insurance in all States is designed to protect homes from covered perils which occur on a ` sudden and accidental basis ' . Termite damage does n't occur instantaneously ; it is something that deteriorates over time ; homes which are well maintained , inspected and treated against termites are highly unlikely to become infected or damaged . The same is true regarding dry rot , wet rot and slow and unrepaired water leaks . It is imperative for homes to be well maintained as homeowners insurance is not designed to provide monetary reimbursement for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of homes ; if this were the case , premium would be much greater than what we pay today . Sudden and Accidental is true regarding any covered incident by the homeowners insurance policy ; covered perils will include for example items such as Fire , Wind , Hail , Water Damage , Burglary etc. . . Each of these items would occur suddenly and accidentally . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It would be a good idea to obtain a copy of your State 's Homeowners Insurance Form and ask a licensed insurance representative to review the policy form for you and highlight the paragraphs most pertinent to the specific situation . Homeowners insurance coverage forms are not often updated and it may only be necessary to review the main points once to understand the purpose of the policy and coverage afforded .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance is most often written on Form HO-3 ; the Form HO-3 Homeowners Special Form does include damage from the perils Vandalism and Malicious Mischief . The coverage will apply to the Dwelling and Detached Structures covered by the policy ; however , the deductible will apply . On the other hand , if only Basic Fire Coverage is purchased , sometimes known as ` Fire & Lightning ' , there would be no coverage afforded for damage caused by vandalism . This would apply to forms HO-1 or DP-1 which are the most basic forms of coverage available for single family residences . It is important that you review your specific insurance policy to assure that you are certain of what is covered ; also , you may contact a company representative for a detailed review of your policy !
Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Form HO3 & Form HO5 -RRB- does cover damage to the dwelling from Snow ; Snow Damage is one of the covered perils under a homeowners package policy . The deductible will apply and will be deducted from the claims payout . You should read the policy form regarding detailed information regarding coverages on your policy . For a sample copy of a Homeowners Special Form HO3 , you may click on the following link : WEBSITELINK
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
The basic definition of Homeowners Insurance is a hazard insurance or fire insurance policy provided for the primary residence of the titled owner of a property . Banks and mortgage companies simply name all policies ` Hazard Insurance ' as the building -LRB- dwelling -RRB- is the hazard ; many others simply refer to all policies as ` Fire Insurance ' as one of the basic perils covered is ` Fire ' . The correct terminology of the house insurance for the home you own and primarily reside in is called Homeowners Insurance . The Department of Insurance in all States refer to the Policy Form as a Homeowners Form , the basic policy form details are provided by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners insurance comes in different forms ; in most States , if you have a Form HO3 -LRB- Special Form -RRB- or a Form HO5 -LRB- Comprehensive Form -RRB- , Wind damage is covered to your dwelling , other structures and personal property . If you have incurred damage as a result of wind , it is important to protect the structure from further damage immediately and file a claim with your insurance carrier . If you are not sure whether to file a claim and need advice , you should contact your insurance agent and discuss the options , size of the claim and prior claims activity that you may have had within 5 years . The policy deductible will apply to the claim , in many States , you will have a separate Wind deductible which may be expressed in the form of a percentage of the coverage section being claimed against . For a homeowners insurance quote , you may click here : WEBSITELINK
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
We will begin to answer this question with the following caution : when one asks about a policy being ` cheaper ' than another -LRB- especially when it is the first question asked -RRB- , the immediate concern arises regarding the lack of importance of the coverage which is the primary reason for purchasing the insurance . To answer the question correctly , Homeowners Insuranceand Landlords Insuranceare not related in any way other than to provide property coverage on a similar dwelling . TheHomeowners Insurance policy is defined and writtenfor the Owner Occupied home of the titled owner of the property ; the Landlords Insurance policy is defined and written for the Tenant Occupedhome of the titled owner of the property . Each policy contract contains an Occupancy Clause stating the occupancy of thedwelling insured . We have witnessed large losses which have been denied by carriers due to the occupancy not matching the policy purpose . Therefore , if you have a tenant occupied home , you will need to purchase a Landlords Policy and if you are seeking to insure your primary home , you should purchase a Homeowners Policy . The LandlordsPolicy statistically poses a greater risk factor to the insurance company ; however generally , the LandlordsPolicy does not provide coverage for personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- and provides a more limited form of Liability Coverage listed as Premises OnlyLiability . Now , regarding cost , the premium is specific to the carrier 's experience with each type of policy.There are insurance carriers that have a much worse historic experience on tenant occupied properties ; thus , the Landlords Policy would be rated as a higher risk than the Homeowners Policy . However , in most cases , for the same Dwelling Coverage amount , we find that the Landlords Policy Premium islower than the Homeowners Policy . Awise word to the public would be to purchase the correct coverage for the application since if a futureclaim is denied based on the incorrect policy form being purchased , the whole purpose of the insurance is void and unnecessary . For more information regaring Homeowners Insurance , please click the following link : WEBSITELINK
Many carriers will issue a homeowner policy form to cover a home construction project when it is new construction . You may also use a `` builders risk '' dwelling policy form when a homeowner policy is n't permitted . Most carriers offer one option or the other . If a homeowner policy is used the `` vacancy an unoccupancy '' provisions can not be enforced during construction or renovation . Make sure to ask these questions of your agent or carrier to make sure coverage applies while under construction . You should also control the insurance and you should not insure the builder in that process . The primary issue here is one of what we refer to as `` insurable interest '' . Quite simply , you have the most to lose in a loss of the home and as a consequence you need to buy insurance to protect both your property interest and provide the lender with protection for the collateral -LRB- your dwelling -RRB- used in the loan . The building or contractor may have an interest in installed materials up to the point they make a draw for the installations , but their interest ends at that point because they do n't have an ownership position in the home . They can purchase `` installation '' coverage in their insurance package that will protect them for the value of their work installed and it is not expensive coverage so they should have this already . Do not agree to assume responsibility for their liability either . If it is their construction site , it is their responsibility to maintain as best as possible to minimize the potential liability exposures . That said , you should make sure to purchase and maintain personal liability for the property too for any potential risk of loss that would be excluded by the building in the site management . Alternately , some carriers will amend current policies to add the new address for liability and then you would n't need to have this coverage added to your builders risk coverage . By the way , the dwelling policy form permits -LRB- in many instances -RRB- the addition of endorsements that provide coverage for the value of material delivery to the site that you might have purchased . These building materials are subject to theft and it is a good idea to know if the builder or you are responsible for materials delivered to the site . Also , a dwelling policy should be created to the new total value of the improvements and original structure on either a replacement cost or actual cash value basis . I suggest replacement cost . Insurance to value is important even on this type of policy . Carriers using the dwelling form of coverage will pro-rate valuation to an average state of completion for premium calculation , but valuation at the time of loss is also tricky so keep good records so you can rebuild the entire structure after a major loss . Cleaning up the concepts here also makes it necessary to make sure that the contractor has general liability and workers compensation insurance . If they have vehicles that operate on the property you should also insist that they provide evidence of vehicle insurance . In every instance above , you should be listed as an `` additional insured '' and `` certificate holder '' during the performance of the construction tasks . If possible , ask them to waive subrogation . Get evidence in writing . A commonly used form is the `` Acord 25 '' Certification of Liability Insurance form and this is commonly provided ask for and get written evidence of coverage as noted above .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
Dwelling fire coverage is typically the least costly coverage for homeowners insurance . This type of policy will typically provide coverage for named perils only . Most homeowners purchase a comprehensive homeowners policy with broad coverage . This type of policy is the most inclusive for coverage . To get a better understanding of the types of homeowners policies available within your area , contact a local agent to discuss your wants and needs for your homeowners policy .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Companies Refuse To Pay ?
It is conceivable that a life insurance policy was issued under false pretense that may be construed as fraud . Any misstatements , misrepresentations or material omissions can constitute fraud and create the basis for claim denial . In addition , claims will be denied if suicide occurs in the first two years of the contestibility period .
Yes , life insurance companies can refuse to pay the full death benefit if the insured person committed suicide during the first two years of the policy , or if the insured person withheld known medical information at the time of application that resulted in death during the first two years of the policy . In those cases , they would most likely return the premiums paid .
When a person applies for life insurance they make representations . The company issues the policy on these statements . If the person makes false representations the company has some recourse to refuse coverage normally for a limited time . If the person commits suicide in the first two years , most companies will refuse coverage . When a life insurance company refuses coverage they return the premiums paid .
If it is due to an accidental overdose reaction to a prescription drug the policy would pay . If it is due to an overdose of an illegal drug the company would investigate the history of drug use and if it was found you lied on an application they would probably refuse the claim . Usually the claim would be refused since it would be hard to prove that the deceased was not taking illegal drugs prior to issue of the policy . After two years the policy would pay regardless as has been stated .
Yes , you can refuse Medicare A . But there are no premiums for Medicare Part A. S o unless you do not want to burden the government with paying a great portion of your hospitalization services , there are not a lot of reasons to opt out of Medicare Part A . You will be automatically enrolled in Medicare A when you turn 65 , so will just need to fill out a form to state the reason why you are refusing it .
When you turn age 65 you are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . You can refuse either part if you wish , but refusing Part A will disenroll you from Social Security . If you are covered under an employer group health insurance plan you probably do n't need Part B.
In my personal experience , all the companies I have worked with want to provide a service for their clients and do it honestly . They try hard to be fair and sometimes I have seen them bend in favor of the client . I think what people hear are the few times someone has been `` wronged '' by the company . From my own personal experience in such a case , I can say that companies can not air their side of the story . With one company I used to work with , the company offered a fair offer to settle in a small kitchen fire . The client refused and wanted the entire house rebuilt . The client went public about how the company would was not making a good offer . Over a year later , the community realized how unreasonable the client was being and his support dwindled quickly . The company had no recourse . The agents had no recourse . They could not talk about the details due to privacy issues . Meanwhile , the client is making every effort he can to publically trash the company . There are some situations where the company has to go by what the contract states and there may be some situation where it may not feel `` right '' to the client , but the company has to honor the contract . With all that said , I would recommend working with a broker to help you find an insurance company and also help fight for you in those situations where you feel like you have been wronged . Having a broker who is familiar with the people in the company will help your case more than you can imagine .
Generally your policy will be either a 6 month or annual renewal . Most company allow you to pay in installments , monthly , quarterly , or some variation . If you fail to pay your premium , you are without coverage . Unlike life insurance , there is no grace period for auto insurance . Some companies will accept late payments but technically if your auto insurance expires on Friday and you have an accident on Saturday , your company could refuse to pay .
If the company requires a paramedical exam with blood , urine or saliva they will know because the test for nicotine . Otherwise the company takes your word for it . If you lie on an application and it is later found out the company can refuse to pay a claim if a death occurs within two years of the policy issue date . You may also be required to pay back the difference in premium or have your policy rescinded and your premiums returned .
If there is any written medical record of your smoking , like your doctor 's chart notes for example , chances are it will be in the MIB records . When you apply for insurance , you grant permission for an insurance company to check your medical records and other history and they may come across it there . Most all companies , if you are looking for best price will also test for nicotine in your system as part of the exam process . Those companies that do n't test , just factor it into the price . So you pay like you do smoke in those cases or somewhere close to . One thing to keep in mind if you decide to miss the right answer when it comes to smoking is that some states refuse to let insurance companies settle a claim at a smoker rate . They have blocked insurance companies from paying the lesser claim and require the insurance company just to return premium . In the case of smoking , these states even waive the two year contestability window . Always check for any special state conditions when signing off on an application .
No , under the mandate you will not go to jail . You will be paying a penalty however that is tacked on to your income tax . Refusal to pay taxes can result in fines or imprisonment whether it involves health insurance or not . You have to decide whether you are going to pick up health insurance or pay the penalty .
Auto insurance follows the car . The car is assigned to a household -LRB- address . -RRB- All the drivers in the household are considered when the insurance company issues the policy . Technically this would mean that a husband and wife living in the same household could not have separate policies . It does happen particularly when one has a very bad driving record and the preferred company refuses to insure that driver . Other substandard insurance companies will cover the driver in which case you have husbands and wives insured separately with different companies . The driver with the bad record is probably excluded from the car assigned to the driver with a good record .
Many companies refuse to write a homeowners policy on a home with a trampoline . Despite the safety devices that are often used , the trampoline has a record of claims that make it unacceptable to many companies . If you are already covered and purchase a trampoline there will probably not be any change until the company discovers the trampoline . You will probably be notified of either a cancellation or notified that the company will not renew coverage . In either event contact your agent .
This is an extremely sensitive topic . The death of a spouse can be life-shattering . A suicide can make it almost unbearable . Not too long ago a friend and client committed suicide . She had been going through a tough spell emotionally , and then almost out of the blue took her own life . Left behind a loving husband and three young boys . Very , very sad . I expedited the claim , as is my usual practice . This job is usually tough , and the fact that her family and mine are friendly made it really hard . My friend , her surviving husband , was so upset he could n't even complete the claim form . I did it for him . The insurance carrier paid the claim as the policy was over two years old . That is standard practice . Will they never pay before then ? I can say that I know of a case with a very high-profile insured who apparently committed suicide just a year after his policies were issued -LRB- he had several - lots of coverage -RRB- . The carriers , of course , initially refused to pay . The insured 's lawyers eventually convinced them to do so : why would they want the bad publicity of not paying a claim ? Will they always pay after two years ? My own feeling is yes , generally , but suspicious circumstances may interfere . If the carrier has reason to believe that this tragic event had been planned to take place right after the two-year anniversary . . Sometimes life is like a mystery novel .
Outside of the application process , no in most cases , unless other wise specified within the policy . If a person passes from drug related issues after purchasing a policy , the company will pay ... Unless , there is a recorded history of drug use prior to the application and the applicant does not disclose this during the underwriting process . After two years this may be a moot point as the contestability clause would prevent the insurance company from refusing to pay . However , not all states have adopted this clause . The clause could be shorter or depending on the state , not applicable at all in cases of insurance fraud .
Obviously , they can drop you for not paying your premium . In California that is a lengthy process . They can cancel a policy mid-term for cause . That again is a lengthy process . Most of the time the company will refuse to renew a policy when they no longer want to accept the risk of a particular car and household .
Life insurance companies can refuse to pay the death benefit if it is two years since the policy was purchased , and they find that there were misrepresentations on the application . E.g. . The applicant was scheduled for a spinal tap due to suspicion of cancer , but answered `` no '' to the question that asked if there were pending tests for diagnosis of disease . If the health questions are answered honestly , the life insurance policy will pay , because they base their approval upon what is written on the application . They also do not pay if death by suicide occurs during the first two years of the policy , or if there are explicit exceptions on a particular policy . E.g. . Some policies will exclude payment if death is caused by piloting a private plane , but that is almost always spelled out in an amendment or rider .
If you have physical damage coverage on your insurance policy and the car is damaged in an accident , the company might declare the car a total loss . When the company does that they will offer to pay you the market value of the car minus the deductible . This is an offer which you can refuse and accept a lesser amount for repairs . If you are able to repair the car and continue the car in service that is an option you can take . You should be given a choice .
Most life insurance applications ask if you smoke . Depending on the size of the policy and the company , you may be asked to take a urine , blood , or saliva test . If you lie on an application and die within the two year incontestability period a company may question the issue based upon cause of death , and could either adjust the death benefit or refuse to pay the claim and refund the premiums paid depending on the circumstances .
When you qualify for Medicare there are two basic choices , you can keep original Medicare and purchase a Medicare Supplement and Prescription drug plan or you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan . Medicare Supplements have a variety of coverage options . Medicare Advantage Plans basically take the place of original Medicare in that administration is taken over by the insurance company . You have HMO 's . These plans have a network that you MUST use . PPO 's or Preferred Provider Organizations , you can use any provider but the copay 's are less if you stay in network . You also have a few Private Fee For Service plans still out there . These are less popular because even though you can go to any doctor , that doctor can refuse coverage on a visit by visit basis . These are the most common plans available . A good agent specializing in the needs of seniors can go into more detail on how they work and the options available .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Needs Life Insurance And Why ?
Anyone who has a family that they care about needs life insurance . If you have a business partner , your partner needs you to life insurance . Life insurance cover your debts , replaces lost income and pays your obligations after you are gone . If you have no assets or debts , and no family , or simply do n't care about fulfilling your responsibility after you are dead , you probably have no need for life insurance .
Suprisingly , far more than you might think . This is a large portion of my practice providing insurance to the 60 plus crowd who have come to me seeking insurance for another 20-50 years . I know many bought into programs offered by the most recent -LRB- yes , they come and go over time -RRB- financial advisors on TV and radio -LRB- ever wonder why they classify themselves as entertainers ? -RRB- whose advice works if nothing goes wrong . Well , how many times does everything work just exactly right ? This is why it is hard to find all these 60 plus year olds through time who have been successful following these programs ... Things change , mortgages are n't paid off , kids and grand kids become responsibilities for grand parents , the pension plan 's best offer is all or nothing and you need life insurance to swing the deal ... So while not every 60 year old needs life insurance , the number of 60 plus people who need life insurance is far greater than those who do n't .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
When you ask which life insurance is best in Illinois there are a lot of thing to consider . First of all why are you buying the policy ? Are you buying it to pay your house off if you die , to pay for a funeral , to leave your family with extra money to help them re-adjust their life after you die or are you buying it as a retirement vehicle to replace your 401K . When you figure outthe why , then we can start to narrow down which company has that type of insurance to meet your needs . My years of experience has taught methat there is no one company that can meet all the individual needs of every person . I always look at the WHY first , then I can educate you on the different companies that could fit your needs . If you need more help feel free to Skype me or call 630-918-1673
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
At LifeQuotes.com we like to have applicants articulate why they want life insurance to make sure that we recommend the right policy from among our 35 life insurers . Important questions to answer are : Why do I think I need life insurance ? Who should get what if I die ? Who are my current dependents ? What is my current and future debt situation ? By when will I have no dependents in my life that I am responsible for ? What would my spouse do or live on if I died ?
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
The question , `` How do I determine how much life insurance do I need '' is one that should be asked by everyone and re-evaluated every year or so . Why ? Because things and circumstances change . There are a number of formulas that are popular with insurance sellers , so the answer you get will depend on who you ask . I would ask you , `` how much do you need for WHAT ? '' In other words : what is your goal for your insurance ? If you have over $ 5.2 million in assets you may want your life insurance to protect your heirs from the tax liability of your estate . If not and your mortgage and credit is all paid off , you may just want your beneficiary to be able to maintain the life style you 've provided for them for the rest of their life . If you still have a mortgage and credit bill you may want to make sure those are all paid in the event of your demise . Or your `` what '' may be a combination of things . That is why you need to work with an agent who will truly look out for your best interests and ask you the right questions .
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Having been in a similar situation I would say `` no '' . Why ? Your chiropractor knows there is a limited amount of time to file with an insurance company for payment . Usually about a year . After that , the insurance company is not obligated to pay the claim . Pretty much neither are you . Why ? you did n't hire his/her accounts receivable clerk . Your chiropractor has a professional responsibility to handle the billing end of their practice along with the treatment end . 5 years late is beyond `` reasonable '' to bill . They screwed up and probably with more than just you . This is sort of a fishing trip to see who bites on their office 's lack of follow through . It is basically stating `` I ca n't run my business professionally , please cover for my mistakes . '' I would n't ignore them , I would talk to them about it and state why I did n't feel the need to pay .
Why invest in whole life insurance ? Well it is one of the few insurance products that you actually control , not the insurance carrier . That is a big reason why whole life insurance is expensive compared to other life products . The insurance company bears the risk of the contract as they can not alter or change the terms of the contract , they can not raise the price of the policy in later years and must receive the policy owners permission to do anything to the policy . What a whole life offers is a decent return for the safety it provides the policy holder . There is very little investment risk to a whole life policy compared to other places where a person can put money . This also is reflected in the return . If you had money invested in 2008 you learned first hand about investment risk . That said , while the rest of my investments were losing 40 % my whole life gained value . You ca n't go backwards with a whole life which makes it a good part of anybody 's planning . I call whole life the most boring investment a person can make . Why ? it does what it says it will do .
That is a good question ! I would certainly expect that your company would have reached out to you , especially if you have a good relationship with your agent . I would also expect that it would be a stock answer for someone calling in to your insurance company -LRB- I 'm assuming that you told them who you use -RRB- to tell them to get an estimate , so they would know how to proceed . I would also expect that your company would have asked them who their insurer was/is . Without a police report , collecting anything may be like pulling teeth , as there is no solid legal proof that the damage was caused by your accident . That said , I would n't expect this to just go away , either . I 'd call your agent , and tell them what happened . ask if a claim had been filed against you , and eplain why you did n't report it . If your damage was negligable , or would cost less than your deductible , they will understand why you did not report it . You want some sort of support if the people who are seeking damages start getting persistant about it , and your agent can be infinitely helpful if that becomes the case . I hope it works out well for you , thank you for asking !
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why is whole life insurance bad ? Because I have something else to sell you or I have n't actually reviewed whole life because I am too lazy to learn about it as a product . Or my favorite , since the IRS created the MEC provision back in the 80 's which created a situation that if you put too much money into a policy , the tax advantages changed . Up until then , your local neighborhood stock broker would sell you life insurance as an investment as it 's qualities were very attractive to investors . Besides common sense tells me that insurance companies price their products based on the risk they bear providing insurance in every and I mean EVERY product they sell . Why would whole life be different ? Why would it be the `` only '' product witha higher price that is `` bad '' for the insured ?
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
The easiest way to come by a calculation on how much life insurance you will need comes down to three factors . First , do I need life insurance . Who would suffer if I died today financially ? Who depends on my income to live and who would assume any of my debts ? Second , what is the total of all of my debt ? Car loans , credit card debt and mortgage , how much to pay it all off today ? How much will I need for children 's education or their living expenses ? Third , take your current nurses salary times ten . Why ten ? The idea is to be able for your beneficiary to invest that amount and draw your replacement salary without touching the principle . Take those numbers and add them together along with the time period that all of that needs to be covered and you will have your face amount and term life years clearly set . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker to help you navigate the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck !
You can have two or more life insurance policies , but if you apply for a second or third policy , the life insurance company does ask if you have existing insurance . Why do they do this ? Because they want to make sure that you are financially qualified for the total amount of coverage that you will own . This is to protect the insurance carrier from unscrupulous persons who would try to gain excessive profit off the death of another , and from terrorists or other criminals who would try to use life insurance for money laundering . For the average person who simply wants more than one policy in order to get sufficient life insurance , or who wants to diversify their coverage between different companies , applying for and owning multiple policies is fine .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Who Regulates Auto Insurance In Michigan ?
In Michigan , Auto Insurance is regulated by the Department of Insurance and Financial Services , affectionately known as DFIS . They are responsible for directing and regulating the insurance companies , brokers , and agents in Michigan . You can access their portal on the michigan.gov website . Here you can find information on any company or agent in Michigan . They are not only in charge of auto insurance , but most other types of insurance , too . So , if you have a few years to spend , have a look around the site . There 's more information than you could imagine .
In Michigan , Auto Insurance is regulated by the Department of Insurance and Financial Services , affectionately known as DFIS . They are responsible for directing and regulating the insurance companies , brokers , and agents in Michigan . You can access their portal on the michigan.gov website . Here you can find information on any company or agent in Michigan . They are not only in charge of auto insurance , but most other types of insurance , too . So , if you have a few years to spend , have a look around the site . There 's more information than you could imagine .
In addition to what was stated above , auto insurance can go up due to legislative reform . In some states there is a catastrophic claims division , which will reimburse insurance companies if they have excessive claims . This fund is collected through your auto-insurance carrier , but goes into a state fund . For example , Michigan has the Michigan Catastrophic Claims Association -LRB- MCCA -RRB- , which costs roughly $ 176/yr . per auto . My best advice is to review your bill with your agent and figure out which costs are incurred because of state regulations and which costs come from your insurance provider . Once you have sorted these out you can then figure out if anything can be done to lower your overall insurance costs .
This depends upon your state and your insurance carrier . I will first speak generally then about the Michigan rules . General : anyone who is a family member and living in your home is covered by your auto insurance . Anyone who is borrowing your car with your permission is covered . Those are the major general coverage . Michigan : no-fault insurance goes like this 1 . owner of the car , 2 . driver of the car , 3 . someone in the car , 4 . a household family member who has no-fault . The general trend in Michigan is to find someone with insurance and make a claim against it , to prevent a mini-tort . I hope this helps .
I 'll apologize first , but I have to disagree with Brandon . Auto insurance IS expensive in Michigan . As of 30 days ago , we have the second highest auto insurance rates in the country . This is kind of surprising if you compare the statutory coverage in Michigan . We have two things that drive up our costs . First we 're one of 26 no-fault states . Secondly , we 're the only state in the US that has unlimited lifetime personal injury protection . If you 're injured in a car accident in Michigan and you 're covered by an auto insurance policy , you 'll receive unlimited lifetime medical benefits as well as work loss benefits . I personally know people who have been injured in a car accident and been receiving medical care for over 25 years to the tune of over $ 5,000,000 . You 'd think we 'd have the highest rates in the country . Now , just because the average rates here are higher than some other states does n't mean YOU have to pay higher rates . There are many factors that determine the cost of your insurance and you can do things to help reduce your cost . Find a good agent and he/she will be able to tell you how to manage your rates .
There are 4 major potential losses that your auto policy protects you from : Bodily Injury , Property damage , Personal Injury , and physical damage to your vehicle . Let 's take a quick look at these . Be advised that I 'm speaking specifically for the state of Michigan . Your state may be slightly different . Bodily Injury - In Michigan if you injure someone in an auto crash , you can be sued for : Wrongful Death Disfigurement Loss of Bodily Function Loss of Wages These lawsuits are big dollars . Be sure you 're carrying high enough limits to protect your assets Property Damage - If you cause damage to property with your car , you can be sued to repair or replace that property Personal Injury - This is an injury to the driver and any passengers in the car . In Michigan , there is unlimited lifetime coverage for this . Check in your state for it 's specific limit . Physical Damage to your auto - This is the coverage that will fix your car for a covered accident . One last item I 'll cover is Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverage . This is a coverage you carry that will pay you if you are injured in a car accident and the at fault driver either has no insurance or not enough to pay what you 've won in court . I did n't touch on things like towing or rental reimbursement as I did n't really think that was what you were asking , but those coverages are also available as well as some other small , specialized coverages . the auto insurance policy is a complicated animal and you need an agent you can trust to be sure you build the right coverage in a way that you can afford it .
Yes , Michigan is a no fault state . As with every no fault state , medical coverage is required . However Michigan goes beyond that , as they are the only state that requires guaranteed unlimited lifetime medical benefits coverage . The auto insurance companies are require to insure the first 500 thousand of an injury claim , a state mandate catastrophe fund -LRB- known as MCCA -RRB- pays beyond that . MCCA fees cost $ 186 per year per vehicle -LRB- and that number seems to go up every year -RRB- . As a result of these factors , Michigan has the highest auto insurance rates in the nation .
That is a great question ! There is a company that commissions a survey every year to provide exactly the information that you asked for , and it was just released not too long ago . You 've got great timing ! They use the example of a 40 year old man with good credit and a clean driving record as their standard , driving a Toyota Camry , and poll 20 zip codes in each State . This years results gave an average national cost for that auto insurance as $ 1311 . The cheapest state was Maine , with an average cost of $ 805 , and the most expensive was Michigan at $ 2476 . It is very important to remember that those are averages , and can vary widely from zip code to zip code , and from driver to driver . Factors such as percent of uninsured motorists -LRB- Florida -RRB- , fatalities -LRB- Wyoming -RRB- and insurance laws -LRB- Michigan -RRB- all play major roles in costs . I lived in Michigan for many years , and can tell you that the `` no-fault '' insurance laws and the very generous medical payments that were allowed , along with the high theft rates made the insurance there much more expensive than it was in some other States that I 've lived in . Please take these survey numbers with a great bit of salt , as the costs within a State can vary greatly , and even in cities from suburb to suburb . I can tell you for a fact that my auto insurance in Chicago was far more expensive than it was when I was living in the rural countryside ... But there you go . Thanks for asking !
It 's the name of a Medicare Advantage plan - I believe it 's offered by blue cross / blue shield of michigan -LRB- as cited on google search -RRB- . Due to CMS regulations , you would need to contact an agent licensed and certified to sell the plan -LRB- or the carrier directly -RRB- to get specific plan information .
there are several sources who track this each year . and because most of them use their own set of criteria for evaluating these rates , the results are over the place ! And year to year , the rankings jump around as much as college basketball polls . but overall , the most expensive state is usually listed as Michigan or Louisiana . The difference between the two usually being whether or not they count Michigan 's state mandated MCCA fee -LRB- $ 186 per year , per vehicle -RRB- as part of the auto insurance premium or not .
I have read that Michigan has the highest auto insurance rates . There is a law in Michigan that provides drivers with unlimited lifetime personal injury protection . This has made rates skyrocket as there is a higher risk for fraudulent claims regarding injuries in minor accidents . Insurance is also higher if you live within city limits or in an area with a high claims history . Hope this helps !
It depends upon the state . I can only speak to Michigan laws , and the answer is maybe . In Michigan , if you are driving without proof of no-fault insurance , then you can receive a ticket in the amount of $ 200 to $ 500 and up to 3 points on your license . The reason I say this might lead to jail time is if you have prior points on your license due to not having no fault insurance . Getting pulled over and cited again for the same violation could land you in court and earn you some jail time depending upon the judge 's ruling . I know that is wishy-washy but there is no direct jail time associated with no insurance in Michigan . In summary , talk to a lawyer about it .
For most people , when they turn age 65 in Michigan they will get Medicare Part A & B automatically . If you are still working you will want to speak to your benefits department to see if you should postpone your Medicare Part B while you are working . Once you activate your Medicare Part B and turn 65 that gives you an open enrollment period so you can choose any Medicare Supplement you like without health underwriting questions . We have helped many people in Michigan compare benefits between employer and what 's available in the market . Often times you can get equal to or more comprehensive coverage for less money . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is great health insurance . Working with an independent agent will save you a lot time and help you look at everything that is available to you . It will make the process seem much less complicated having a professional to help compare whats available . You can Compare Michigan Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You can also give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
The best life insurance in Michigan depends on the person applying for it . There are some companies that specialize in life insurance for people with health conditions such as diabetes or MS. There are others that have very good rates for those who are overweight or obese . Some have great prices for Term while others offer exceptional Permanent products . To find the best life insurance for you , go to a website that offers life insurance in Michigan and give them your details . By shopping from multiple companies you will have your best chance at finding your best rate .
To qualify for Medicare in Michigan , you must be age 65 and have paid into Medicare taxes for at least 40 quarters , or be/have been the spouse of someone who did . Disabled persons may qualify for Medicare after two years of receiving Social Security benefits . There are other situations where someone in Michigan may qualify for Medicare , such as having ESRD , ALS , being railroad worker , being a government worker , etc. . See Medicare.gov for the fine tuned details .
Auto insurance in Michigan is no more expensive than auto insurance in any state . Auto insurers -- like all insurers -- have varying appetites for risk . Some insurers may not like the average risk associated with policy holders in Michigan and may price themselves out of the market intentionally -LRB- i.e. even though they are n't thrilled about covering you , they 'll gladly take your money if you 're willing to give them enough of it -RRB- . You should seek out he advice of an agent who can show you rates from numerous carriers so you can compare rates and select the best one for you .
Yes , they can , in certain situations . I 'll say first that I can only answer for Michigan but most states do behave similarly . Your eligibility for auto insurance with a standard carrier is measured on a point system . To be eligible for a standard carrier in Michigan , you can not have more than 6 eligibility points . The point system is pretty simple , with more points for more serious infractions . For instance , a speeding ticket for 5mph over the speed limit , and other similar violations are worth two points while an at fault accident is worth three . These points do have an expiration , normally two to three years for accidents and minor violations . Major violations such as a DUI or wreckless driving expire in five years and one of these deems you ineligible . Your insurance company can cancel your policy if you reach 7 points or more that have n't expired . Two at fault accidents in the last three years will also get you here as your second at fault is charged four eligibility points . Two things to consider : First , you can still get insurance if you have been cancelled but it 'll cost you a lot more . Second , do n't think that , just because the judge said he 'd waive the points from a ticket , these wo n't count for insurance purposes because they will . If it shows up on a driving record or a claims record , the companies have no choice but to apply them . If you have a good agent , he can find coverage for you even if you 've been cancelled by a company . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and listen to him/her . You 'll come out better in the long run .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
In the state of michigan it is illegal to drive without insurance . Insurance in Michigan has personal liability and property damage which if in a accident and you hit something and do damage it will cover your damages to property and if you are hurt in a accident and do n't have medical insurance it will cover you medically
Variable Annuities are regulated by multiple agencies . First , the Department of Insurance of the State the Annuity was issued in regulates them to some extent . The states Securities Regulator also regulates them . FINRA & the SEC are two other regulators who have a hand in their regulations as well , depending on the agent who sold the policy .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
In What States Is Car Insurance Not Required ?
Virginia does not require you to carry car insurance as long as you pay an uninsured motor vehicle fee to the state . New Hampshire and Mississippi will offer vehicle owners the option to post a cash bond . All other states will require you to maintain auto insurance to operate a motor vehicle on the roadways .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
If you live in one state and are fortunate enough to also own a vacation home in another , and you choose to have a car registered in state for your use while you are there , then it is possible , if not required that you have a car insurance policy in that state . Most if not all states require car insurance in order to register a car for use on public access roads and highways and in most cases , that insurance must be obtained in the state in which the car is registered . Honestly that is the only circumstance I can think of where you may have insurance on a car from another state which is not where you primarily reside .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
The 1st thing you need to think about is what you can afford for the cost of insurance and also what can you afford to loose id you have inadequate coverage . Each state varies for the amount of liability that you are required to have . In Montana the limits are 25K per person -LRB- medical payment to others -RRB- 50K per accident and 10K for property damage which if you think about it that is not much coverage in the event of a major accident . Then you need to take in the factor of uninsured and underinsured both are fairly inexpensive and well worth the few dollars it is a month here in our state 1 in 3 cars has no insurances your odds of an accident and getting hit by someone with no insurance is high . Laws in most states require you to have the state minimum . I recommend the higher limits then what state requirements are however . You also have a budget in mind It does no good to buy a policy with higher limits if you can not afford the monthly payment . So it really depends on what you can afford to loose and what fits your monthly budget.I recommend talking to a local agent and seeing what they have for rates as a independent agent can compare rates with many carriers and can help you muddle through the confusion .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
Generally speaking , probably not . Most States require you to have at least a mandatory minimum amount of Liability Insurance in order for a car to be registered . Your Car Dealership will need to obtain proof of that coverage from your Isurance Professional in order to register the car for you , so without such proof , they ca n't really do anything to complete the deal . In addition , unless you are paying cash for the car , it will either be financed or leased and in both cases , there are requirements to have both Comprehensive and Collision coverage on the car and , in the case of a lease , the required amount of Liability coverage which is somewhat more than any State 's minimum requirement .
Most states require proof of car insurance in order to register your car for use on public roads and highways . So , if you reside in one state and have a car registered there , then the insurance would have to be issued from that state as well . Check with your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy , but generally , the coverage you have in your policy will protect you across state lines , and into Canada . There may be limitations on travel to Mexico . Now , there may be other factors to consider as well . Here in CT , once one establishes residency , one has 30 days in order to register their car here . In order to register a car here , a CT issued Insurance policy will be required .
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
Yes . Each state has it 's own department of insurance and sets it 's own requirements or compliances for all policies sold inside their particular state . Some states may look almost identical to other states requirement wise . Others like New York for example have very NY state specific rules that often require insurance companies setting up companies inside NY state . You might find ABC Insurance Carrier doing business in 49 states an ABC Insurance of New York doing business there . The state that I work in also is considered a pretty restrictive state for insurance companies . Restrictive is n't necessarily a bad thing . The idea is done with consumer protection in mind . For my state , it means new plan approval is much slower than other states , but the flip side of that is if a problem with a plan occurs , it usually has n't hit the `` streets '' in my state yet , so the consumers avoided a problem that way .
This is important because rates and coverages vary from State to State . Each State decides its own car insurance requirements individually . If you get pulled over by the police and you do not have the right State coverages policy for that State you could receive a big fine . You may not have to buy coverage for that State if Let 's say you take your car to a new state for 2 or 3 month for a job assignment you might be fine keeping your home States insurance coverage . In any case , you should always check if using an out-of-State policy , check with your insurer to make sure its allowed and that you have enough protection for where youre headed for that State . Some insurance companies say it 's okay if youre only going to be in the non home State for no more than 60 days , still check to make sure .
In most , if not all states , car insurance is required in order to register and operate a car on public access roads and highways . If you lease a car , or if you have a car loan , car insurance will also be a requirement of the lender or leasing company so , the general `` rule of thumb '' is that if you own or lease a car , you will need car insurance in order to do that .
This is a complicated question and really depends upon the insurance laws of your state . No-Fault States : if you live in a no-fault state then you could potentially leave your car in the street without insurance ONLY IF your car is parked in a legal zone and in a safe manner . What I mean by this is you do not want your parked car to be at risk for any liability in the case of an accident . For example , if you are parked on the street outside your house and it is within a couple of inches of the curb and no where near a fire hydrant , then if someone hits your car they will collect against their own insurance and you will not be liable if they sustain any severe physical injuries . However , if your car is in an illegal parking zone or you parked far from the curb , then the person who struck your auto might have cause for a liability suit against you . As a word of caution , just remember that you can get sued regardless of fault and you will have to defend the case until it is dismissed for lack of liability . This means you will still have to pay for an attorney , so it is better to have insurance . Tort-State : you need insurance because they person who hits your parked car will sue you to reclaim collision damages . Please note this is a very brief answer and there are other possible scenarios in both no-fault states and tort-states that can lead to you being sued for having your parked car in the street . I hope this helps .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
I can only think of two institutions that actually require car insurance . First , if the state in which you live and register your car has a law that imposes such a requirement in order to register it . Second , if you buy a new car with a lien or lease a new car , the financing company will imposes requirements for insurance . Now , that having been said , it still makes good sense to buy car insurance even if either of those two reasons are not imposed . Car insurance protects you in the event it is stolen , damaged in an accident or otherwise affected . But further , it provides important financial protection in the event you cause an accident and are held liable for any injuries or damage that result from that accident .
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
If car insurance is mandatory , there are two possible entities that make it so - either your State Department of Motor Vehicles or your auto loan or leasing company . Usually these days it is both . Most states require car insurance as part of their procedure for registering a car . In all cases if you have a loan , the lender will require you to carry both Comprehensive and Collision coverage in order to be sure that their interest is protected . If you are leasing your car , not only will Comp and Collision be required , but Liability coverage as well .
No , the requirement to have and maintain car insurance is not a Federal Law , it is however , State Law in most , if not all states now . Insurance is regulated by each state 's Insurance Department and the requirement to have car insurance is a state law that is managed and regulated by each State 's Department of Motor Vehicles .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
The certification needed to sell life insurance in almost every state is that states life insurancelicense . All states do differ on core requirements . Almost all require either classroom time or online time on average 40 hours in order to produce a certificate to take the exam . There are other requirements depending on the state such as background checks and/or fingerprints . Fees differ greatly as well . Once you are licensed most states will require a continuing education program at least every two years to keep you up to date on changes in laws and procedures . Be sure and carry errors and omissions insurance as well to protect yourself . the best place to start is on your states website and look under Department of Insurance . The states requirements will be listed there .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is The Best Car Insurance For DUI ?
There is no single best auto insurance company who is best for a DUI , or any other violation for that matter . However , there are plenty of non-standard companies who go much easier on DUI 's than standard companies . Companies will also vary greatly based on the levels of coverage you request . Your best bet is to simply get a quote with an independent insurance agent who carries multiple companies to quote you with .
A DUI will affect life insurance if within a certain number of years of applying for the policy . With simplified issue plans -LRB- those that do not require an exam , and usually do not require medical records -RRB- , you may be approved as quickly as two years after the DUI , although some carriers will make you wait 10 years after the DUI to get that type of coverage . If applying for a medically underwritten policy , the rate will vary depending on how many years from the DUI it has been . Underwriters also consider whether you had treatment for alcohol abuse in conjunction with the DUI , whether there were repeat offenses , if you still drink alcohol , etc. . In the worst case scenario of recent DUI , repeat DUI 's , repeat treatments , still drinking , there is guaranteed issue life insurance for those who fit the age guidelines . To get your best price for life insurance after a DUI , it is a good idea to use a broker who can shop the many policies out there and find you the best price .
A DUI will affect life insurance rates , or the ability to get some life insurance policies , for some time . The amount of time depends on the policy . Some No Exam policies will delay until two years after the DUI . Others will not count the DUI unless drug or alcohol treatment was needed . And others will not look at DUI 's at all . When applying for a medically underwritten policy , a DUI can keep a person from the best rates for as long as 10 years with some companies . But if it was an isolated incident and the applicant now drinks lightly or not at all , the impact is less than if substance abuse treatment was ordered and the applicant has gone back to drinking heavily . The life insurance company will also look at other traffic violations , if there a multiple offenses , and other factors . To find your best rate after a DUI , contact an agency that sells policies from many companies so they can sift through them for you and find you the one that will give you the best rates .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
If the DUI is many years ago and you have not had any repeat offenses , you can get Life Insurance at a similar rate than if you never had a DUI at all . If the DUI was very recent , and especially if your license is suspended because of the DUI , you may need to purchase a guaranteed issue policy until some time has passed . Once you get a year or two out from the DUI you will be able to buy at least simplified issue life insurance , and again , when more years have passed , the effect of the DUI on your rates will lessen until it has little to no effect at all . Repeat DUI 's , being ordered to attend treatment multiple times , or multiple types of driving offenses can complicate things . Contact a good impaired risk life insurance agent to sort through many companies for you so you can get the lowest possible rate that you qualify for at this time , and keep in mind that you may be able to get a better price in the future .
A DUI can affect life insurance rates , or even cause a decline . But if the DUI happened years ago , it may not affect your rate at all . The key factor with a DUI is how long ago it occurred ; whether there was more than one DUI ; and , if alcohol treatment was ordered , whether you continue to drink alcohol . One DUI over 5 years ago will affect rates far less than repeat DUI 's within a few years , especially if alcohol abuse/addiction is present .
Your car insurance rates will typically rise after a DUI How much ? It depends on the company you 're insured with and other violations you may have on your driving record . A large increase and/or suspension are possible . What to do ? Utilize experienced brokers to find the lowest rates . That 's our job and along with our top-rated websites , we shop the major companies to bring you the lowest prices . Also , the relationship between broker and underwriter can sometimes help the customer . Having an extra helping hand in your corner may be critical to negotiating the best rates . As the DUI gets older , your rate should gradually reduce . Of course , there are other policy changes that may help , including increasing deductibles . Working with an experienced broker online gives you the best of both worlds . A DUI is a serious matter and you need knowledge and unbiased advice working with you .
A DUI will impact your car insurance rates , although the increase in premium will depend on several factors , including the company you are insured with , your driving record -LRB- other than the DUI -RRB- , number of vehicles insured and liability limits that you carry . As an experienced car insurance broker -LRB- for 33 years ! -RRB- , we work closely with any customer who is convicted of a DUI . It 's important to maintain quality coverage , but , of course , it 's also important to ensure all discounts are being applied , and all options are reviewed so you pay the lowest available rate .
Yes . DUIs can greatly affect your the risk class you can qualify for in life inurance . A history of being charged with driving under the influence -LRB- DUI -RRB- or driving while intoxicated -LRB- DWI -RRB- one or more times can make it difficult to obtain the life insurance coverage you need at an affordable rate . The ratings that life insurance companies will assign for people with history of DUI vary substantially between companies and the difference could cost you thousands of dollars . Whether applying for a fully underwritten or non-medical life insurance policy , the carriers will want to know the input regarding a number of questions -LRB- typically you would fill out a DUI questionnaire form with the application -RRB- to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- How many times have you been charged with DUI/DWI ? 2 -RRB- When was the most recent charge ? 3 -RRB- Are you currently on probation ? 4 -RRB- Has your license been revoked or suspended one or more times ? 5 -RRB- Have you been cited for any other traffic offenses ? 6 -RRB- Have you sought treatment for alcohol abuse at a rehab facility or attended meetings with support groups like Alcoholics Anonymous ? 7 -RRB- Are you still drinking , or have you quit completely ? The most likely offer you receive , depending on how long it 's been since the DUI , will either require a table rating and/or a flat extra rating . A table rating is an additional percentage charged on top of the standard premium . As an example , a Table D/Table 4 is generally about two times the standard premium . A flat extra rating is an additional cost per thousand dollars of coverage , such as $ 2.50 per thousand . Another example would be a $ 1,000,000 policy with a flat extra of $ 2.50 per thousand would require additional premium of $ 2,500 in addition of the standard rate , regardless of how many years the policy is guaranteed . If you have a history of DUI or DWI in your records , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating , flat extra rating , or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer . Your best option is to consult with an experienced life insurance broker before applying for any coverage . We can shop the case for you among multiple carriers to get an understanding of the risk class carriers will likely assign for your coverage - this will point you in the direction of who is the most appropriate carrier to apply for coverage with . The risk class is the most critical item for coverage because it determines the premiums . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Getting life insurance with a DUI is possible . The price you pay will largely depend on how long ago the DUI occurred . If there was alcohol treatment involved , and a second DUI occurred after that , you may not be able to get a medically underwritten policy , but will be able to get a simplified issued policy a year or two after the last DUI .
A DUI will not directly affect the rate on your homeowners insurance . It can affect your rate by proxy though . DUI are typically very costly . If your credit score should take a big hit due to the financial consequences of the DUI your rate could conceivably change . To say that your homeowners rate absolutely would not be affected by the consequences of a DUI would possibly not be true .
You absolutely can get life insurance with a DUI on your record , though there may be limits on the amount of the face value . In today 's environment of guaranteed issue , there are not many entities that are prohibited from coverage . With adverse situations such as a DUI , any policy that is not guaranteed issue will most likely be rated ; more than one DUI will be looked upon in an unfavorable light by most underwriters , and will definitely be rated . This not only will result in higher rates , but may also result in limits on the amount of coverage provided . Short answer - yes you can get coverage with a DUI on your record .
When you are convicted of a DUI you will be required to notify the DMV of your financial responsibility . That will trigger a reaction by your insurer . They will know immediately that you have been convicted of DUI . What they do at that point will vary . At renewal you will find that you have been assessed points for the DUI and those points will trail you for 10 years in California . In California you will also lose your good drivers discount . Sometimes clients think that this is the time to shop for auto insurance . Unless you simply can not pay the premium , dropping coverage at this stage is not in your best interests . Your existing insurance company is likely to treat you with more consideration than any subsequent insurance company . By the time you pay the fine , pay for the drivers education course and face the doubling of your auto premiums you will determine that drinking and driving does not pay in California .
Great Question . Car insurance will go up after a DUI it might be up to % 100 increase in insurance pemium . Some companies will also drop your insurance if you get a DUI or DWI it all depends on your insurance company . Good luck and stay safe while driving your car .
-- > Normal 0 A major violation , like a DUI conviction , could have a significant impact on your auto insurance premium . Most insurers are not anxious to offer their most favorable rates to customers with that kind of a blemish on their driving record . Shopping around on the Internet may be an alternative but any insurance company looking at you will just see a car with an operator with a DUI conviction . If they consider you at all , they would at prices they charge other operators with major violations . If you are in this situation , I suggest you take a look at your entire insurance portfolio . Most people are more than a car insurance policy . They have home insurance , other family cars , life and health and often business insurance . It is possible one of those companies or agents will look at you as an entity and not just someone with a major violation . You may be able to explain the circumstances and reduce the underwriters fear a similar event will reoccur . Seldom do you get this opportunity when dealing with someone on-line . Will it work , maybe not , but it certainly is worth consideration if you are dealing with this kind of an issue .
It depends ! Like most everything in the world of life insurance , rates and qualifications for different life insurance policies vary widely from company to company . Typically , though , if your DUI was more than 5 years ago it wo n't affect your ability to get a policy . Inside of 5 years , it will , and it will also affect your rates , as most insurance companies wo n't give you their best rates if you have a DUI . This means that your DUI will cost you some extra dollars when it comes time to pay your premiums .
Car insurance rates typically increase after a DUI ... although the amount of the increase will vary depending on the company you are insured with . There are other costs associated with getting a DUI , including possible reinstatement of your driver 's license and purchase of a Bond , as required by the state . Question answered by E. Harris ... Car insurance broker since 1980 with top-rated website .
If you mean does auto insurance pay for a claim when you had an accident and were charged with a DUI , the answer is yes . I have seen some companies however exclude paying a claim if the DUI was considered a felony . This is usually not the case and the claim is paid . I would say this is about the only silver lining of what comes to follow by a DUI .
There is no single best auto insurance company who is best for a DUI , or any other violation for that matter . However , there are plenty of non-standard companies who go much easier on DUI 's than standard companies . Companies will also vary greatly based on the levels of coverage you request . Your best bet is to simply get a quote with an independent insurance agent who carries multiple companies to quote you with .
A DUI is certainly a major infraction that will affect both pricing and availablilty of car insurance . In some states , a DUI charge will result in at least a temporary suspention of your driver 's license . It wou dbe very difficult to shop for and obtain car insurance with a suspended license , if not impossible . In a situation like that , if it is a first such offense , usually the state will offer a course that , once completed , will clear your record and reinstate your license . Shoping at that time would be much easier and more successful .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Does A SEP Retirement Plan Work ?
A simplified employee pension program is based on an IRA . However , since it is sponsored by the employer the limit for contributions is much higher -LRB- 25 % of compensation up to $ 52,000 . -RRB- Each participant has a separate account . There is a minimum contribution for each SEP participant of $ 550 . For additional information contact a life insurance agent that specializes in retirement programs .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement.The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back.If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you.With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay.The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA.Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap .
How to set up a retirement plan ? The first thing you want to do is figure out your options . If your a business owner than their are tax advantages you can have for setting up a retirement plan for your employees . Some choices are 401k , IRA , SEP , Roth IRA , life insurance , pension plan . Once you know and learn which retirement plan you want to implement than the next step is paper work . You should always speak to a professional retirement planner .
Yes it is . A SEP A Qualified Retirement Plan meets the requirements qualify under Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -LRB- ERISA -RRB- . SEP tax deductible contributions can be up to 25 % of compensation not to exceed $ 51,000 for 2013 . There may be cost of living adjustments made to SEPs if the government continues its historical annual increase .
SEP IRAs provide retirement benefits for the business owners and their employees . There costs are relatively low . The contributions are based of 25 % of your net income not to exceed the maximum limit of $ 51,000 . Theres no catch up provision for SEP IRA contributors over age 50 . SEP IRA are based on net income , so do the math first because you may discover that a 401k plan with catch up provisions may be a better deal for lower income filers .
A SEP IRA is a qualified defined contribution retirement plan under ERISA -LRB- The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . -RRB- SEP IRAs are easy to administrate . Theyre particularly well suited for sole proprietorship or self-employed . The contributions are tax deductible . The plan account accumulates tax deferred . The distributions are taxable as ordinary income .
Planning for retirement is planning for your lifestyle in your golden years ; you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your effective tax bracket and a life expectancy report so you can create a reasonable timeline . If youre younger than age 45 , you should consider retirement at age 70 because your life expectancy may be 20 to 25 years more if youre a nonsmoker and in good health . You need to determine if your employer sponsors a defined contribution plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , especially if the employer offers a contribution match . If your employer doesnt offer such a plan , you may want to consider a Roth IRA or Traditional IRA . If youre self-employed and you make six figure income , you may want to investigate SEPs . Some retirement plans are non-qualified using annuities and/or life insurance to fund their retirement . Once you perform your personal financial profile , you can begin the review process to determine how youll fund your retirement .
If youre signing up with a Part D plan for the first time , you may do so in one of three different enrollment periods , depending on your circumstances : The initial enrollment period - If youre not yet in Medicare and have no other drug coverage thats creditable -LRB- considered as good as Medicares -RRB- , you can join a drug plan at any time during your seven-month initial Medicare enrollment period . This lasts from three months before to three months after the month you turn 65 -LRB- or , if youre younger with disabilities , the month you receive your 25th Social Security disability payment -RRB- . You can also use this IEP if you turned 65 while living abroad or in prison . It lasts from three months before to three months after the month of your return or release . The special enrollment period - Youre entitled to an SEP in certain circumstancesfor example , if you lose creditable drug coverage -LRB- such as from an employer or union -RRB- , or you turned 65 before moving abroad or going to prison and now want Part D coverage on your return or release . You do not have to request an SEP in these circumstances , but can just go ahead and sign up with a plan . This kind of SEP lasts 63 days and you must be receiving Part D coverage before it expires to avoid a late penalty . The annual open enrollment period If you miss your deadline for joining Part D during an IEP or an SEP , then you can not enroll in a drug plan until the next OEP . This enrollment period -LRB- which until the end of 2010 ran from November 15 to December 31 -RRB- now runs from October 15 to December 7 each year . You also have to wait for an OEP if you deliberately drop creditable drug coverage that you already have -LRB- for example , from an employer or union -RRB- . The OEP also serves as an annual opportunity for anybody already enrolled in Part D to switch from one plan to another .
There are two options you should consider : whether the retirement plan should be qualified or non qualified . Qualified retirement plans to review may be employer sponsored 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s or SEP IRAs or a Roth IRA or traditional IRA for individuals . Non-qualified retirement plans may use tax deferred annuities or life insurance . In unique circumstances , you can combine some of these plans together .
You want to determine your tax bracket , how much you want to put away for retirement and how long will you make contributions . If you are in a high tax bracket , you may want to consider a qualified plan like SEP IRAs , that have significant opportunity to contribute based on your income . Non qualified plans are generally funded with life insurance and annuities with less restrictions than a qualified plan .
A good retirement plan should first start with a commitment to a disciplined deposit schedule , i.e pay your self first . Then you need to develop a a financial profile that includes a risk assessment analysis based on your financial goals and the time to achieve them . If you 're in a high tax bracket , you my want to consider a qualified defined contribution plan like an IRA or SEP IRA if your employer does n't offer a retirement plan . Make sure that the savings and investment products are suitable for your financial profile and risk tolerance .
A qualified retirement plan , like those under ERISA -LRB- the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 , -RRB- are tax deductible to the plan participant . Examples of qualified plans that are deductible are 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , IRAs , SEP IRAs . There are other tax dedcutible plans as well like 412 -LRB- e -RRB- and HR 10 plans .
For the self-employed , selecting a retirement plan is a question of your total income and ease of administering the plan . If youre not making that much money a simple individual retirement account -LRB- IRA -RRB- or Roth IRA should suffice . But if youre making six figures or more you may want to look into a Simplified Employee Pension Individual Retirement Arrangement -LRB- SEP IRA -RRB- that can contribute up to 25 % of your income with a cap limit of $ 51,000 for 2013 .
Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRAs -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and SEP plans are examples of defined contribution plans under ERISA . These qualified plan are sanctioned government retirement programs with tax deductible contributions , tax deferred accumulation and taxable distributions including basis . 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans allow employers to match part or all of the employee contributions .
Most qualified retirement plans are under ERISA -LRB- The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . -RRB- Theyre usually employer sponsored or individually elected plans , i.e. employer examples would be 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , SEPs or 412 -LRB- e -RRB- . Individual plans examples would be Roth IRAs or traditional IRAs . The contributions are tax deductible . The plan account accumulates tax deferred . The distributions are taxable as ordinary income .
Qualified plans are a sanctioned government retirement plan with tax deductible contributions , tax deferred accumulation and taxable distribution including basis . An example of this would be the ERISA -LRB- The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . -RRB- Some plans allow employers to match employee contributions . There are several qualified plans available for individuals as well as employer sponsored like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- s , 412 -LRB- e -RRB- , SEP IRAs , IRAs , etc. .
Medicare Part D Drug Plans can generally only be switched during open enrollment -LRB- Oct 7th - Dec 15th -RRB- . The new plan would become effective Jan 1st 2015 . However , there are SEP 's -LRB- Special Enrollment Periods -RRB- , in which you can make a switch outside of open enrollment . Here are some examples of SEP 's ... You move outside your current plan 's service area , you become eligible for medicaid or a low income subsidy , you have Medicare AND Medicaid -LRB- Medi-Medi -RRB- .
If you lost your job and health insurance within the last 60 days , you can qualify for an SEP -LRB- Special Enrollment Period -RRB- . OK ... So what is an SEP ? If Open Enrollment has ended , it allows you to purchase a Marketplace plan with full subsidies -LRB- if you qualify -RRB- and have your pre-exsisting conditions covered . No waiting period or extra copay or deductible for these conditions . You can choose among all of the available major carriers that offer coverage in your area . This `` qualifying event '' allows you to obtain affordable medical coverage at any time of the year . You will not have to answer medical questions , and you do not have to keep the same company that you had while working at your previous employer . An experienced broker and his/her website will be very helpful . Insist on a broker with at least 25 years of experience in the business . NOTE : COBRA may be available , but typically will be more expensive than an Exchange plan -LRB- especially if you qualify for a federal subsidy -RRB- . Short-term -LRB- temporary -RRB- plans are also offered by many top-rated companies . However , they are non-compliant , do not cover pre-existing conditions , and are not eligible for subsidies . Important : This question was answered by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's leading and most experienced -LRB- 35 years -RRB- health insurance brokers . His website , Majormedicalhealth.com , is the premier trusted healthcare website in the US , and offers the lowest individual and family rates from top-rated companies . UPDATE : The Supreme Court has still not rendered its decision regarding subsidies . UPDATE : July 2015 . The decision has been made ! Subsidies will continue to be paid on both state and federal Exchanges .
You can get coverage during the open enrollment period , after that you must have a what 's called an SEP. . A life event for the Special Enrollment Period which is now until the open enrollment period begins in November . If you do not qualify to enroll in a plan during SEP you may opt for a short term plan to bridge the gap to the open enrollment period .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does EOI Mean In Life Insurance ?
EOI stands for `` Evidence of Insurability '' . EOI shows the insurer that the insured person meets the health and risk criteria required by that company in order to get a certain policy . Group life insurance plans might not require EOI for a certain amount of life insurance , but then require EOI for additional coverage , or coverage for family members . Most privately purchased policies do have EOI requirements of some kind , although they can vary widely from simply answering a few questions to having a full medical exam done .
EOI stands for `` Evidence of Insurability '' . EOI shows the insurer that the insured person meets the health and risk criteria required by that company in order to get a certain policy . Group life insurance plans might not require EOI for a certain amount of life insurance , but then require EOI for additional coverage , or coverage for family members . Most privately purchased policies do have EOI requirements of some kind , although they can vary widely from simply answering a few questions to having a full medical exam done .
EOI in life insurance stands for `` evidence of insurability '' . When you are taking an exam to get a life insurance , you are providing evidence of insurability . It is whatever is required to show that you are qualified to obtain that policy . When life insurance does not require EOI , that can make the policy very expensive , as in guaranteed issue life insurance , which has no evidence of insurability requirements . However , sometimes no EOI can be a perk . E.g Many term policies offer the opportunity to convert them to permanent policies without evidence of insurability . That is a perk , especially if your health deteriorates and you can not qualify for a new term policy . It is a double perk in that the converted permanent policy will be rated the same as your term policy was .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
What does life insurance in force mean ? On a individual life insurance in force means how much death benefit a person has that is paid and active on a given day . For a life insurance company , in force means the total of all policis they have issued and that are currently paid . In force represents the insurance company 's obligation to policy holders .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
That is an excellent question ! And one that a whole bunch of people are asking . Unfortunately for many people it means that their retirement plans may not fund the retirement they 'd envisioned . For some it means they will need to scale back expenditures more than they 'd hoped . For others still it is a very scary thought , as medical expenses continue to rise , and benefits continue to be cut . For those still able to react to the situation , it means increasing the amount set aside for retirement , and investing in vehicles that can continue to pay out regardless of how long the retiree lives . It means looking more closely at what retirement looks like to you , cutting expenses , and maximizing income.It means a close eye on returns , and better planning . If you have concerns over your retirement plans , please consult with a trusted adviser , and look at where you currently stand , and what options are available to you . Thanks for asking !
Paid up life-insurance means you dont make anymore payments on the policy . You still get the coverage , but you no longer have to pay for it . But heres the question : suppose you wanted to keep paying ? Why wouldnt the insurance company allow you to do so ? I mean , some of these permanent insurance policies can get very cash rich . Whole life policies can pay some pretty hefty dividends . Universal life policies can apply a pretty decent interest rate . As I am sure you have heard , there can be some great tax advantages to accumulating wealth inside life insurance : tax-deferred accumulation , and , under the right circumstances , tax-free distributions . So why wouldnt an insurance company just let you go for it ? A number of decades ago , they did . People were taking out policies with face amounts of $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 , but putting huge amounts of cash into them . Huge amounts . They really milked the tax advantages of the product . Of course , the IRS got wise to this and imposed certain rules . These rules limit the amount of money that can grow inside these policies and still avoid taxation . You can exceed this limit , but then you get a tax bill . From this point of view , paid up means if you put more cash into the policy , you could create a taxable event . It also means something else , in consideration of the expenses of the policy . Lets say you take out a universal life product with a guarantee to age 100 . This means that given the proper payment schedule , both the premium and the death benefit will be guaranteed to a age 100 . The emphasis is on the payment schedule . If you meet it , then no more payments would be required to secure those guarantees . It would be paid up . Whats interesting here is that , depending on the product , a lot of flexibility exists for designing a payment schedule . You can have continuous pay and simply pay the lowest amount required annually . You could have a single pay in which just one payment in the first year will get you what you want . You could have a 10 pay , which means you just pay for 10 years - and still get the guarantees . You could have 20 pay . And so on . Depending on your cash flow and other factors , you could pay up your policy with any number of strategies . And then you simply would not have to worry about paying for your life insurance , even though you would have the coverage for as long as you need . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
I 'm afraid you have confused what comprehensive insurance means . In regards to comprehensive insurance , `` comprehensive '' is a component of auto insurance , but not a type of insurance . comprehensive coverage protects your vehicle from losses that occur by means other than collision . Examples include theft , vandalism , weather damage , hitting a deer , etc. . As far as borrowing someone else 's vehicle , your auto insurance does n't cover you . Their insurance does . That is , auto insurance always follows the vehicle , not the driver .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
Keep in mind that if one insurance company will not insure your home that does not necessarily mean that your home is uninsurable . And to take it a step farther ... . just because your home does not qualify for insurance with the standard markets , this does n't mean that it will not qualify for a home with an excess / surplus lines carrier like Lloyd 's . Contacting the insurance department is a good idea as I know that PA has the `` Fair Plan '' and you can go to : WEBSITELINK for some additional info because your state might have a similar site to access . -- @MooneyInsurance
Body Mass Index -LRB- BMI -RRB- does impact the premium for life insurance . BMI or simply the height and weight of the proposed life insured is a key factor in preferred risk guidelines . Favorable height and weight combinations can mean preferred rates . Average combinations will mean standard rates as a starting point for underwriting . Unfavorable combinations may mean substandard rates at best . Height and weight charts can vary significantly by life insurer . An independent life insurance professional can survey a wide variety of insurers to help you select the best ones to apply with for the best possible outcome .
Yes , Medigap and a Medicare Supplement are actually pseudonyms , two different terms that mean the exact same thing . Medigap refers to a policy that `` fills in the gaps '' of what Medicare does not pay , much like a Medicare Supplement , which is intended to `` supplement payment for items that Medicare does not pay in full . '' Either way you say it , both terms mean the same thing .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
The letter D is part of some claim numbers . A plain letter D means `` Aged Widow , age 60 or over '' . D1 means `` Aged Widower , age 60 or over '' . D2 means `` Aged widow , second claimant '' . D3 means `` Aged Widower , second claimant '' . D6 means `` Surviving Divorced Wife , age 60 or over '' .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Medicare Advantage plans can be a an HMO or PPO . However , Medicare Advantage/HMO/PPO mean almost the same thing once you are on Medicare , meaning they are all a Medicare Advantage plan . One of the common statements from people turning 65 is , `` I want a PPO '' , because that is what they knew before they went on Medicare . However , it means something way different now that they are on Medicare . A Medicare Supplement is the only plan that does n't have a network and that gives you the greatest flexibility in deciding who you go see for care .
What is voluntary term life insurance ? Usually it is a program offered through your employer to provide employees with an opportunity to purchase life insurance through work and payroll deduction . In some cases , voluntary group life offers life coverage at a higher cost , but with fewer health questions and no lab testing . The thing to keep in mind when considering life insurance is the more questions they can ask , the cheaper the cost will be for a healthy person . That does n't mean Voluntary life is bad , it means you may find coverage cheaper elsewhere .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much Home Insurance Should You Have ?
All home insurance carriers have replacement cost estimators designed to calculate replacement value of a home in the event of a catastrophe . Carriers do n't look at purchase price , appraised value or taxable value when calculating replacement cost . Often I have a customer tell me that their home is n't worth what we have it insured for or they could rebuilt it for less money . But they rarely factor the cost of replacing a home after a catastrophe when material and labor costs skyrocket .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's an interesting question - do you mean how much coverage do you need to purchase to ensure the value of your belongings are covered adequately , or how much should the policy have paid out to you after your claim was processed ? In the case of coverage , you would need to have an idea of how much value there is to be insured . For example , do you have a lot of electronics , or jewelry ? If so , you would need more coverage than someone who has very few of those things . If you meant how much should you have received , that depends on a lot of things specific to your policy and claim . If you would like more information , I 'd be happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You need to get at least as much coverage as the insurance carrier says is required to rebuild your home . Insurance carriers will provide a calculation of how much it should cost to rebuild the home in a certain area . If you go below that amount then there could be penalties in how much the insurance company will pay out . On a related note , you should obtain a guaranteed replacement cost increase . This guarantees that you will get an extra amount of coverage -LRB- usually a percentage of your current coverage -RRB- to rebuild your home in the case of a catastrophic loss . This way , if you want to rebuild on a nice piece of land , you will not be stuck fronting more money in order to get back to where you were . In summary , never low ball your coverage to save money because you will end up paying out-of-pocket to get back to the status quo .
Coverage A-Dwelling , on your declaration page is the amount of money your home is insured for against covered perils . How much should your limit be ? It should be the amount of money you need to rebuild your house from scratch . That amount of money is called Replacement Cost . How do you determine the Replacement Cost Value ? To determine the Replacement Cost Value , you need to know or measure the square footage of your home . You also need to know the special features of your home , like skylights , central vacuums , etc. . You also need to know the quality of your improvements . For example , are your kitchen and bathroom fixtures Builders Grade or Luxury ? If you can gather that information , call your agent and review it with them . They should be able to help you come up with a reasonable estimate of your homes replacement value . You should revisit the value every three to five years or after you make a significant improvement . You want to keep pace with your homes value , but you dont want to over insurance and waste money . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
You should follow the old adage , `` Expect the worst and hope for the best , '' when insuring your property . For home owners insurance you should have enough coverage in the case of a catastrophic loss -LRB- i.e. you lose everything -RRB- . You will want to take into account how much it would cost to rebuild your home , anysurroundingstructures -LRB- like a garage -RRB- and all of your personal property you will have to replace . On top of that , you will need to take into consideration the loss of use factor , which is how much will it cost you to stay elsewhere while your home is being rebuilt . In summary : add up the following four items 1 . cost to rebuild house 2 . cost to rebuild surrounding structures 3 . cost to replace personal property 4 . cost to stay elsewhere for an extended period of time
-- > Normal 0 Basic homeowners policies provide coverage in three general areas . They agree to indemnify you for some or all of the cost to repair or replace your home or your personal property should it be damaged or destroyed . They agree to indemnify you for some or all of your increased living expenses should your home be damaged or destroyed and you are required to live somewhere else while your home is being repaired . They agree to provide you a legal defense for certain civil actions should something you do or fail to do cause someone injury or damage and they will pay some or all of civil judgments should you be found responsible . How well you are reimbursed for these types of expenses depends on the specific policy you purchase , the premium you pay and the insurer you choose . You might also be interested in the Insurance Library responses to questions like What Should I Look For When Buying Home Insurance ? and How To Select Homeowners Insurance ?
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Is Car Insurance For A Volvo ?
Great Question a very nice car a Volvo . The cost to insure a Volvo depends on many factors like your driving record , your insurance history , your age , your driving experiance and what part of the country you live in . You can contact your local independent agent to shop around for you .
Great Question a very nice car a Volvo . The cost to insure a Volvo depends on many factors like your driving record , your insurance history , your age , your driving experiance and what part of the country you live in . You can contact your local independent agent to shop around for you .
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
I suggest a number of different approaches . How much coverage would you want the person to carry if they injured you or your family or damaged your property in a car accident ? If you cause an accident , injure family members riding with you and are from a state permitting intra-family suits , how much coverage would you want available to pay for their injuries ? And of course , how much do you stand to lose ? What is your net worth , the value of your earning power , and/or the value of your personal integrity ? None of these methods will lead you to the perfect limit but they are the considerations I would suggest one think about when selecting the appropriate amount of insurance . In addition , I always suggest your uninsured/under-insured motorists coverage -LRB- the one that covers you , your family and possibly the passengers in your car in case the other car is not insured or poorly insured -RRB- be consistent with the coverage you carry in case you hurt someone else . However if none of these considerations apply , one must always be aware of the minimum limits required by most state laws .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
How much is for car insurance ? Hmmm . What is this person attempting to ask ? How many people like auto insurance ? No , I think they mean something else . How much does it cost ? Yes , that 's probably it . Rates vary , depending on your age , location , driving record and vehicle . As experienced brokers , we 're always happy to shop for the best rates and show you the lowest prices . LIVE -LRB- 2014/2015 -RRB- Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier US car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites where consumers find the lowest available rates .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Do Long Term Care Insurance Premiums Increase ?
Long Term Care Insurance Premiums can increase . Historically , rates have not increased often , or by much . There has been a larger increase in premiums recently due to higher than anticipated claims , and lower than anticipated interest rates . Long Term Care Insurance companies do all they can to keep their premiums from going up , but they also must do what is needed to keep their companies and existing policies viable .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
No . Allstate used to market long-term care insurance through Lincoln Benefit Life , but has not done sofor at least 5 years . All long-term care policies sold by Allstate through LBL are being fully administered and claims paid as approved . Since the carrier is not currently marketing LTC insurance , no new premiums are coming in . As a result , policy holders of this carrier 's long-term care plans of insurance are likely to experience increases in premium in the 30-50 % range . Such an increase occurred in 2010 . However , while those percentages seem extremely high , consumers need to understand that in spite of the increase , the higher premium is probably still a bargain compared to what LTCi costs today . Carriers that increase premiums are making every effort to help people keep at least some of their coverage by making adjustments to benefits , features , or riders going forward .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The cost of long term care exceeds the expectation of most people . Long term care can easily erode a substantial amount of money . Because traditional life insurance doesnt address the cost of long term care , these policies are important . The cost for long term care is increasing every year . Companies that once offered Long Term Care have withdrawn from the market . In response some life insurance companies are offering limited living benefits which would act like Long Term Care insurance by paying out part of the death benefit before death occurs .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
If you do not have an estate to protect then you may not need Long Term Care . If you can qualify for Medicaid or a Medicaid waiver program then you do not need long term care . If you do not mind spending down all you have worked for during your life to go on Medicaid then you do not need long term care . If you have an estate you want to pass to your heirs , loved ones you want to protect from the burdens of caring for you when you become sick and can no longer care for yourself then you do need long term care insurance . If you want choices on where you are cared for then you need long term care .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
Long-term care insurance can cost anywhere from about $ 1000/year for an individualbase plan all the way up to $ 14,000 / yr or more for a fully loaded policy , per person . Factors that determine cost include , but are not limited to : 1 . Health and health history -LRB- one might pay more if not in good health , or be declined -RRB- 2 . Ability to pay the premium , knowing that premiums can be increased over time . 3 . Whether they look at long-term care insurance as paying for as much of care costs as possible or if they are simply looking to offset a specific amount from an insurance company and pay for the rest themselves . 4 . Male or female - rates have been `` unisex '' , but will soon be gender specific in all states , except , Montana . Based on claims experience , men will pay less , women will pay more . 5 . Age - Premiums are lower the younger one applies and is successfully underwritten 6 . The Insurance Company - major carriers that intend to stay in the business charge higher premiums than smaller carriers that are testing the waters or are trying to get market share , knowing that they can apply to states to increase premiums later . 7 . Bells and whistles - Benefit rich coverage costs a lot more than a base plan of insurance ; riders can increase premiums by more than 150 % . 8 . Location - the actual cost of care varies across the country , so if one intends to move to a place that has a lower cost of care , they might not buy as much coverage now . 9 . Pre-application research - the applicant may save money by calling around to various home care services and facilities to find out what the range of costs is in the area in which they intend to spend their retirement years . 10 . Married or single - carriers provide discounts on premiumto those that are married or in a domestic relationship -LRB- usually 3 years minimum -RRB- . 11 . Employer-paid coverage , either in part or in whole , is a great way to get LTCi coverage and save money . Typically , the policy is portable , as well . 12 . Being an informed consumer - long term care insurance is complex because it promises to cover someone in a complex and unpredictable situation . Most states and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- publish consumer brochures that provide valuable planning information . Knowing what to expect can help a person design their coverage more intelligently and for less cost .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Is Banner Life Insurance ?
Banner Life Insurance Company is a very strong company and one of many I do represent and sell . They are part of the William Penn Co. of NY and resideout of Maryland.Banneris an A + rated company by A.M. Best , and AA - -LRB- very strong -RRB- with Standard & Poor 's . They approach $ 6 billion in assets and are approaching $ 600 billionof in force life insurance . I am very comfortable with the carrier and their customer service .
I find Banner Life Insurance to be very competitively priced , able to take on many types of health , offering a nice array of products , and fine to work with . Their company is highly rated and is one of the arrows I keep in my quiver when shopping for people looking for affordable and secure life insurance .
Banner Life is an A + rated -LRB- A.M. Best -RRB- , AA - -LRB- S & P -RRB- carrier that specializes in term , permanent , universal and an array of life insurance products . Originally The Government Employees Life Insurance Company -LRB- GELICO -RRB- in 1949 the company eventually became Banner Life . As of 2012 , Banner has over $ 517 billion of life insurance in force and over $ 5.7 billion in assets . Out of the Maryland , this company utilizes the internet and internet technologies to deliver easy to use products to its clients . Excellent carrier and competitive prices across the board . For more information on Banner Life 's products visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
Banner Life Insurance Company is a subsidiary of Legal & General Group Pic -LRB- L&G -RRB- . Banner offers life insurance in every state except New York , but in New York it is called William Penn. . As of today -LRB- 6-5-2015 -RRB- Banner Life Insurance Company is rated A + by AM Best and AA - by S&P .
Banner life insurance is a great company and they are part of the Legal & General of America companies . Banner started in 1949 as Government Employees Life Insurance Company -LRB- GELICO -RRB- . AM Best rates Banner life insurance A + which is a measure of its financial strength . They often have some of the least expensive term premiums and I personally use them very often .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Banner Life is a very good company . I have had a contract with them and know them to be very competitive and very financially sound . Check the AM Best Ratings of any company you look at . They should have at least an A rating . There are many good companies out there . If you like the Banner Life plans then you should n't lose any sleep if you go with it .
Your insurance is only as good as your agent . An Agent can provide you personal service as most online carriers you can not get this type of service . In many cases you can get a better rate from an agent because they listen to you and what our needs and make sure you are properly covered . I have thousands of time Beat the online rate with the same carrier even . It really comes down to personal preference . Some say they like the online because it is 24/7 That is ok also But our clients We personally answer the phone 24/7 I can count on 1 hand how many times a client has ever had to leave a voicemail . If your looking for just numbers and no service then by all means online is the way to go just make sure that you are properly covered and also make sure that they can even sell insurance in your state . I ca n't begin to count how many people I know that have purchased online because a of a banner ad they clicked or got in their email and purchased coverage then found out later after a claim that that carrier is not allowed to even sell in our state hence no coverage and out of the money they spent on a policy . Or worse yet bought a policy online and it was not even a real company now days the scammers are out there buyer beware .
Here are a few of the 30 year guaranteed term life insurance companies : American General , American National , Ameritas , Aviva , Banner , Lincoln Benefit , Lincoln National , MetLife Investors , Nationwide , Principal , Protective , Pruco , Savings Bank , Security MTlNY , Transmerica , United Omaha . There are other companies who have guaranteed universal life that can be configured to perform like a 30 year term life insurance . Keep in mind that there are age limitations to 30 year guaranteed term life insurance .
I 'm assuming that you want to know what company offers the least expensive Term life insurance policies in general . Most likely that would be an insurance provider that specializes in Term insurance and does n't do a lot of expensive advertising . Personally as a broker I only work with companies that are A + rated or better by the 4 independent rating agencies , and among those I 've found that Genworth , Banner , and Transamerica usually come in with the lowest rates . However the specific circumstances of the insured will have a bearing on the premiums . Gender , age and health , as well as the length of the term and the face amount of the policy each have a good deal of impact on the premium . My question to you , or rather my advise would be to get with a qualified Insurance Adviser and find out how a term policy may benefit you with your particular needs , and if Term may NOT be what you should be looking at implementing . Term insurance is the cheapest of the different types of life insurance to be sure . But is Cheap what you want or need , or is it rather Value that will benefit you the most ?
There are hundreds and hundreds of good lifeinsurance companies . There are certain things to look for in getting good products at good premiums . First look for life insurance companies that specialize in life insurance and not the car or health companies that sell life insurance as a product line . You can choose well known life companies like Metlife , Prudential , NY Life , Transamerica , ING or John Hancock . These are great life insurance companies with big marketing budgets so theydo not always have the best premiums for the coverage . There are great little known life insurance companies like SBLI , Banner , Genworth , Assurity or Minnesota Life that usually independent brokers know about but not the general public because they do n't market their company and many times have better premiums for the same exact product of the well known names . Second look at the companies ratings with AM Best , Moody 's , Standard Poor 's and Fitch . Only choose `` A '' rated companies for financial strength . You want the company to pay your loved ones when you die .
Dave Ramsey recommends using Zander Insurance Group , an agency that sells term life insurance products from a number of different companies . Some of these companies are American General , Banner , Genworth , Protective , Transamerica and United of Omaha . In other words , the same companies most of us life insurance brokers offer to our clients .
There are literally hundreds of life insurance companies in the United States alone and hundreds more abroad . Some of the more well known companies are Metlife , Genworth , NY Life , Prudential , American General , ING , Transamerica and Northwestern Mutual . You know these companies because of their marketing budgets . In most cases these companies have higher premiums because they must of set their advertising budgets . There are several other lesser known life insurance companies like SBLI , Banner Life , Assurity , North American , Fidelity Security and AXA Equitible that usually a life insurance broker would know . These companies are just as good and financially sound as the more well known companies , they just do n't have the larger marketing budgets and rely on brokers to sell their policies . This usually translates into more affordable premiums to the consumer . I recommend contacting an independent broker to professionally shop for the best polices at the best rates for your unique situation .
There 's hundreds and hundreds of companies out there . A list of some of the top companies is as follows : 1 -RRB- American General 2 -RRB- MetLife 3 -RRB- Lincoln National Life 4 -RRB- Prudential 5 -RRB- Transamerica 6 -RRB- ING 7 -RRB- Principal National 8 -RRB- Mass Mutual 9 -RRB- Guardian 10 -RRB- Banner Life 11 -RRB- Genworth 12 -RRB- New York Life 13 -RRB- United of Omaha / Mutual of Omaha 14 -RRB- SBLI -LRB- Savings Bank Life Insurance Company of Massachusetts -RRB- 15 -RRB- John Hancock When looking for a life insurance policy , there 's a ton of information to sift through and comprehend . An independent broker can help you find the program that will best serve your needs . If you would like some assistance , send me a private message on here or check out my website -LRB- a link is available on my profile page -RRB- .
I find Banner Life Insurance to be very competitively priced , able to take on many types of health , offering a nice array of products , and fine to work with . Their company is highly rated and is one of the arrows I keep in my quiver when shopping for people looking for affordable and secure life insurance .
There 's hundreds and hundred 's of life insurance companies in the marketplace and there are many carriers that have a superior financial rating -LRB- `` A '' , `` A + '' , or `` A + + '' rating -RRB- . Some of the big name companies with superior ratings that feature competitive rates in the term life insurance marketplace are Banner Life , MetLife , American General , Lincoln National , Genworth , Ohio National , Principal National , just to name a few . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Banner Life Insurance Company is a very strong company and one of many I do represent and sell . They are part of the William Penn Co. of NY and resideout of Maryland.Banneris an A + rated company by A.M. Best , and AA - -LRB- very strong -RRB- with Standard & Poor 's . They approach $ 6 billion in assets and are approaching $ 600 billionof in force life insurance . I am very comfortable with the carrier and their customer service .
I believe that Banner Life Insurance Company is a good company . They offer very competitive premiums , are willing to do underwriting for a variety of health conditions , offer a nice assortment of products , and are reputable . They sometimes are referred to by the name of their parent company , L&G .
As far as competitive premiums . I prefer Federal Life , Banner and Trans America . But again , every client 's situation may differ on need , current health , past health and budgeted allowance for protection . What is the product being used for is it mortgage protection , income replacement or consumer debt ? Are there any dependent children ? Many factors in providing the right plan for the right situation .
There are a number of factors involved in determining the premium or `` rates '' for a given life insurance policy . In addition to the length of the term , the age , gender , health and tobacco use or not of the insured , as well as the amount of insurance , there are `` riders '' that may be added to the basic policy . In general most of the insurance companies that specialize in Term insurance have rates that are fairly competitive with each other and typically lower than the companies that specialize in permanent insurance . There may be a bigger difference in the rates for various riders or if the health of the insured warrants it , the `` table ratings '' assigned to different health conditions . With all the above considered , In my experience - for a basic term insurance policy the following companies usually come in with the lowest quotes : Protective , Transamerica , Genworth , Banner , Prudential . My advise is to work with an experienced insurance adviser / broker who can help you to determine your actual need for insurance and then implement the right policy for your particular needs .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Can People With Ms Get Long Term Care Insurance ?
People with MS can not get traditional long term care policies , but some people with multiple sclerosis can get life insurance policies with `` living benefits '' that will provide money for extended care needs . Also , there are riders on some traditional life insurance polices that allow the death benefit to be used for long term care type needs while the insured person is still alive . When MS is very mild , it may be possible to purchase a life insurance policy with that type of rider .
People with MS can not get traditional long term care policies , but some people with multiple sclerosis can get life insurance policies with `` living benefits '' that will provide money for extended care needs . Also , there are riders on some traditional life insurance polices that allow the death benefit to be used for long term care type needs while the insured person is still alive . When MS is very mild , it may be possible to purchase a life insurance policy with that type of rider .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
Most people with MS can get life insurance . If you have relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis that has not caused you to go on disability , there is a good chance of getting a medically underwritten policy for any amount you want and in any type of policy that you want . If you have progressive MS , you will probably need to get a simplified issue policy , but you can still get a policy . If you need assistance with ADL 's or are in a wheelchair , you can get Guaranteed Issue Life Insurance if you fit the age guidelines . Be sure to talk to an agent who understand MS Life Insurance so that you can save yourself frustration . It does not have to be an ordeal to get life insurance while having MS.
It is very difficult to get Long Term Care Insurance while having MS. Long Term Care Insurance companies are especially sensitive about insuring those who have health conditions that could develop into trouble with doing Activities of Daily Living independently . However , some long term care type riders on Life Insurance are allowed for a person with multiple sclerosis , and `` living benefit '' life insurance policies might also fill that need . Talk to an agency that specializes in life insurance for persons with MS to see your full range of options .
Yes , most people can get life insurance while having Multiple Sclerosis . As you know , there is such a wide range of symptoms , from virtually having no impairments , to having to be confined to bed . So the type of life insurance you can get with MS depends on your own situation . If you have relapsing remitting MS and are still able to work full time , you should be able to get a medically underwritten policy at a reasonable price . If you are at the other extreme of needing assistance with ADL 's , you can get guaranteed issue life insurance if you fit those age guidelines . It is important to use a life insurance agent that understands multiple sclerosis underwriting , and carries a wide range of products , to get your most affordable MS life insurance .
Most people with Multiple Sclerosis can get life insurance . If your MS is the relapsing remitting type with few effects and no recent exacerbations , you can usually get a medically underwritten policy for any amount you wish . If having one of the progressive types of multiple sclerosis , recent exacerbations , treatment that is being changed due to being in effective , or unable to walk or do ADL 's unassisted , you will need to take simplified or guaranteed issue coverage . But life insurance is still available for you if you fit the age requirements . To get life insurance while having MS , contact an agency that will ask these type of questions and know which company covers each scenario . It is easy to be quoted too strict -LRB- `` you have MS so no one will cover you '' -RRB- or too lenient -LRB- `` go ahead and take your chance on applying for this $ 1,000,000 policy even though you are taking Aricept '' -RRB- . Your policy will go much smoother and you will get the best possible price using agents who specialize in affordable MS life insurance .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Most people can get life insurance if they have MS -LRB- Multiple Sclerosis -RRB- . Relapsing remitting MS with stable treatment over one year , no exacerbations for over a year , and few effects from the disease -LRB- able to work full time -RRB- will enable you to get the most affordable MS life insurance , possibly rated as good as Standard to Table 3 . If you have one of the types of Progressive Multiple Sclerosis , are in a wheelchair or unable to do your own ADL 's -LRB- Activities of Daily Living such as bathing or eating without the assistance of another person -RRB- , you will usually need to go with guaranteed issue life insurance . There are also a number of plans for persons with all types and severity of MS. Contact a good impaired risk agent who specializes in this type of coverage to cover the bases accurately and find your best rate .
Unfortunately , persons who have a high risk of having the need to collect on long term care benefits may be unable to get long term care insurance . E.g. . If they have already had a stroke , or have had an amputation due to diabetes , have Alzheimers , or have MS , they probably can not get long term care insurance .
Getting Disability Insurance with MS is extremely difficult . Graded policies claim to cover those with Multiple Sclerosis , but the requirements are so restrictive that almost no one can get it . If you have very mild MS and no exacerbations in years , it is worth a try ! Living Benefit Life Insurance policies are one method of getting benefits that you have the option to use during your life , and this type of policy is not as difficult to qualify for as Disability Insurance , when you have MS. If unable to do two more more ADL 's , it can be accessed for cash to pay bills and use as you wish . However , the Disability Income portion of Living Benefit policies is usually a rider for which you need to qualify , making that feature harder to get . Again , I 'd consider it a delightful challenge to help you get whatever is out there for you to get .
You can get life insurance with MS , or Multiple Sclerosis , the vast majority of the time . Mild to moderate relapsing remitting MS can qualify for a medically underwritten policy , and there are simplified issue plans for advanced complications or progressive MS. If unable to do own ADL 's or in a wheelchair , guaranteed issue policies are available in most states , but those do have a minimum age of 40-50 years old . Medically underwritten policies are not graded , have no limit on face amount -LRB- except what you can financially afford and qualify for -RRB- , and cost less than most simplified or guaranteed issue policies . If you are able to work full time , or have minimal effects from your MS , you can get life insurance just like anyone else .
Our agency specializes in life insurance for people with Multiple Sclerosis , and we find that they are often very discouraged by their experiences in trying to find get insurance . They say it is a breath of fresh air to talk to agents who understand their disease and know what options are available for each type of MS. So my number one answer to this question is yes , just make sure you go to someone who specializes in MS life insurance . Whether your MS is relapsing remitting or one of the progressive types will be the first indicator of whether you can get a medically underwritten policy . If progressive , there are a number of No Exam policies available . If in a wheelchair or needing help with ADL 's , guaranteed issue is the only choice . Relapsing remitting MS with minimal to moderate symptoms , stable and effective treatment , able to work -LRB- although being on DI will not matter in some cases -RRB- , and no large effect on memory will result in a policy rated Standard to table 4 with the carriers we find best for multiple sclerosis life insurance .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
In order to qualify to get a Long Term Care Insurance policy , you must fill out an application and take an exam . The application goes to underwriting where it is determined if your health is good enough to get approved . If it is , you are issued a LTC policy . Some health conditions that would cause a decline are AIDS , ALS , Alzheimers , dementia , kidney failure , liver cirrhosis , and Parkinsons . Certain mood disorders , moderate to severe arthritis , MS , advanced diabetes and/or heart disease , stroke , and other conditions that can lead to inability to care for one 's self are also potential hindrances to qualifying for Long Term Care Insurance . To find out whether you qualify for Long Term Care Insurance , call or visit an agent that carries several LTC choices and answer all their questions . It is much easier to find out ahead of time if you can not qualify , than it is to be declined later . This way you can also get the policy that has your best price if you do qualify .
It is difficult to get a Long Term Care Insurance policy while having multiple sclerosis . There is a graded benefit policy that you could get if your MS is very mild and you have not had any exacerbations in many years . Another option for Long Term Care Insurance that is available to persons with mild to moderate multiple sclerosis is Life Insurance with living benefits . This allows you to take part of the death benefit at cash while you are still alive if you are unable to do some ADL 's . Of course , you must be able to qualify for this policy , but it is much easier to qualify for this life insurance policy than it is to qualify for a long term care insurance policy . Please feel free to give me a call and I would be happy to show you your options .
Unfortunately , it is extremely difficult to get Long Term Care Insurance if you have MS. Another LTC idea for someone with mild Relapsing Remitting Multiple Sclerosis is to apply for a Life Insurance policy with a rider that offers long term care type benefits , or allows you to use some of the face amount of the policy as a `` living benefit '' if the you lose the ability to perform two or more ADL 's . While the benefits may not be as large or comprehensive as if purchasing a traditional Long Term Care policy , the chances of qualifying for this while having Multiple Sclerosis are better than your chances of obtaining traditional LTC insurance .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Two years ago I featured a week long series on Women Against MS on my daily financial talk show , The Business Insurance Zone . On one of the episodes , we outlined the stages of MS. The stages of MS are important to life insurance underwriters to categorize theunderwritingoffer . A preliminary discussion with a life insurance professional can help determine whether to seekcoverageand receive a non binding estimation of the cost .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is Dwelling Amount For Homeowners Insurance ?
The dwelling amount should be the dollar amount that home is covered for . This amount is what would be paid to rebuild your home in the event your home is deemed a total loss due to a covered loss . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and the exclusions contained within . Or , you call your local agent and have them go over the policy with you .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
-- > Normal 0 I suggest a different approach to addressing this situation . The only way you could obtain homeowners coverage on a house you do n't live in is to be less than candid on the application . If a problem occurred , you may find yourself and your parents without any coverage . To be eligible for most homeowners policies , a dwelling must be owner - occupied . The policy only covers the dwelling on the residence premises . If the named insured -LRB- you -RRB- dont reside there , the insurance company could deny your claim . Some insurers however will issue homeowners coverage to an insured -LRB- s -RRB- who has a life estate in a property . You could own the property ; grant a life estate to your parents . They could obtain homeowners policy naming them as insured -LRB- s -RRB- and you ; the owner of the property could be included as an additional named insured for your interest in the dwelling and the personal liability insurance . There is a standard endorsement available for that specific purpose . Your parents would be covered for their personal property , additional living expense and personal liability . You would be covered for damage to the dwelling and liability for injury or damage to others arising out of your ownership of the property . In my opinion , this would be the most practical , effective and economical way to address this kind of a situation . It is probably more common than you think .
There are many factors that affect the policy premium pricing . Therefore , more questions than answers ... initially ... First of all , what State are we talking about , since rates vary greatly from State to State , not to mention significant regional variations within a State ? For one example , think of a coastal location exposure to wind vs. a dwelling located inland and not generally exposed to the same potential perils . Which one is going to present the highest chance of risk for wind damage losses ? This will definitely affect the premium . Additionally , one insurance company 's rates can vary greatly from those of another . Also , a few of the many other questions : What is the amount of intended insurance needed on the dwelling ? How old is the home ? What type of construction ? What type of fire protection and proximity to the dwelling ? What other types of protection devices and method of monitoring ? Any dangerous animal breeds ? Swimming pool ? You really need to talk to an agent about rates in your location . Ask for quotes from the strongest carriers . Ask particularly about their financial strengths and claims paying histories . Try to get carriers with A.M Best ratings of A or better , if at all possible . Additionally , many State Insurance Departments have consumer information for the public , relating to homeowner polices . Do some of your own ` on-line ' research , if possible . You can also ask other homeowners in your area about their carriers ' pricing and experiences with claims .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance primarily covers damage due to fire and other covered perils to the primary residence of the titled owner of the dwelling insured . Homeowners Insurance is defined as an insurance contract to protect owner occupied dwellings . For homes that are tenant occupied , a Landlords or Dwelling Fire policy would be needed . Homeowners Insurance will cover the dwelling -LRB- house -RRB- , other structures -LRB- garage , gazebo , guesthouse -RRB- , personal property -LRB- furniture , appliances -RRB- , loss of use -LRB- additional living expenses -RRB- , guest medical payments , and personal liability -LRB- for family residents -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The first thing I recommend looking for is appropriate coverage . Your homeowners insurance should have enough dwelling coverage to cover not only the cost of rebuilding your home , but also cover the clearing and removal of debris is your home is destroyed . All too often , I see homeowners policies that ONLY cover the cost to rebuild . If you do n't have enough to clear the debris , you could get stuck with that cost yourself -LRB- and that cost is in the neighborhood of $ 30,000 ! -RRB- . If the cost to rebuild your home becomes MORE than your coverage , is there anything in place to help pay for that ? For example , Farmers Insurance will include an extra 25 % of the dwelling coverage . So , if your home coverage is $ 100,000 , and it ends up cost $ 125,000 to rebuild your home , Farmers Insurance would pay that amount -LRB- minus your home deductible -RRB- . The final thing I would point out would be the deductible . In many cases , if you have never had a claim , you can have a lower deductible . However , many insurance companies are moving to a higher deductible model -LRB- usually as a percentage of the dwelling coverage -RRB- . So , if your dwelling coverage is $ 200,000 , your deductible would be 1 % of the dwelling , or $ 2,000 . I recommend finding a company that offers a deductible you feel comfortable paying .
Homeowners Insurance typically includes coverage for your actual home -LRB- the Dwelling Coverage -RRB- , coverage for separate structures -LRB- such as detached garage or shed -RRB- , coverage for your belongings -LRB- both the items inside your home , as well as items that may be outside of the home -RRB- , liability protection -LRB- coverage that protects you if you are sued -RRB- , and medical payment coverage -LRB- an amount thatcan paid to someone that is injured on your property -RRB- . These 5 items are usually included in any homeowners policy -LRB- renters and landlord policies have variations of these -RRB- . However , some insurance companies also include some extras at no additional cost . For instance , Farmers Insurance includes an extended coverage of 125 % of the dwelling coverage . This means that if the cost to rebuild the home exceeds the amount of dwelling coverage , Farmers Insurance will cover an extra 25 % over and above the dwelling coverage . Farmers Insurance also includes ID theft protection , and a few other extras .
Adequate home insurance coverage is very important , and the discussion should be had with a professional independent agent . The best way to answer this question is to provide some general information for the primary/main coverage types on the home insurance policy -LRB- please note that each state and company policy coverages and requirements vary . This is why it is important to review in detail with your professional independent agent -RRB- . Dwelling value : this is the coverage limit that protects the structure/dwelling . Ideally , this coverage limit needs to be set at the proper replacement cost valuation . In the event of a total loss -LRB- fire , tornado ... -RRB- , what is the amount of insurance coverage on your dwelling that you would need to get you back in that exact same house?The answer to this question is the dwelling amount coverage limit that your home insurance policy should have . Personal property/contents coverage limit : this is the coverage that provides protection for your personal belongings . It is suggested to take pictures of your belongings -LRB- especially your more valuable items -RRB- as well as have copies of the pictures and any receipts to provide proof of ownership in the event of a claim . Again , like with the dwelling value we discussed above , the question here is what is the value of all of your items in your house ? Or , what would thecost be toget everythingwhat you have now in your house if a fire or tornado destroyed it all?The answer to this question is the personal property contents limit that your home insurance policy should have . Also - please note that if you have a mortgage on your home , most often the lender will require the loan amount or 100 % ofthecalculated structurereplacement value to be the required dwelling coverage amount.This amount can vary , and to ensure that you are getting the coverage protection you need without overinsuring , please review with your local professional independent agent . Liability coverage/medical pay to others : this is about the least-expensive part of a home insurance policy , but it is very important to have . The minimal amount of liability coverage suggested to have for this coverage category is $ 300,000 , although usually the bump up in coverage to the $ 500,000 liability limit is usually very small . And , the medical payments to others coverage should be at $ 5000 . These coverages protect you from injury that an unrelated -LRB- visitor -RRB- sustains while on your property , or that you are deemed to be liabile -LRB- responsible -RRB- for . Please note that these are just a couple of the important insurance coverages that are included on your home insurance . There are many other coverages that might be included with the policy that you choose or there might be other suggested coverages that you can add to your home policy that gives you the extra coverage protection that you need . There is not a general coverage limit or value that is used for determining the proper coverages for your home insurance . Every client is different and so are their needs . Make sure that you review what your needs and coverage requirements are , and let an independent agent create a policy specifically for you and your needs .
The short answer is , of course , as much as you need to protect yourself . However , in most homeowners ' policies , the amount of coverage stated in the policy to protect your personal belongings is the result of applying a factor to the dwelling amount . In other words , in most Homeowners ' policies , the amount listed for personal property will be 70 % of the stated dwelling amount . Talk with your Insurance Professional to make sure that full `` Replacement Value '' is included in your policy .
Many carriers will issue a homeowner policy form to cover a home construction project when it is new construction . You may also use a `` builders risk '' dwelling policy form when a homeowner policy is n't permitted . Most carriers offer one option or the other . If a homeowner policy is used the `` vacancy an unoccupancy '' provisions can not be enforced during construction or renovation . Make sure to ask these questions of your agent or carrier to make sure coverage applies while under construction . You should also control the insurance and you should not insure the builder in that process . The primary issue here is one of what we refer to as `` insurable interest '' . Quite simply , you have the most to lose in a loss of the home and as a consequence you need to buy insurance to protect both your property interest and provide the lender with protection for the collateral -LRB- your dwelling -RRB- used in the loan . The building or contractor may have an interest in installed materials up to the point they make a draw for the installations , but their interest ends at that point because they do n't have an ownership position in the home . They can purchase `` installation '' coverage in their insurance package that will protect them for the value of their work installed and it is not expensive coverage so they should have this already . Do not agree to assume responsibility for their liability either . If it is their construction site , it is their responsibility to maintain as best as possible to minimize the potential liability exposures . That said , you should make sure to purchase and maintain personal liability for the property too for any potential risk of loss that would be excluded by the building in the site management . Alternately , some carriers will amend current policies to add the new address for liability and then you would n't need to have this coverage added to your builders risk coverage . By the way , the dwelling policy form permits -LRB- in many instances -RRB- the addition of endorsements that provide coverage for the value of material delivery to the site that you might have purchased . These building materials are subject to theft and it is a good idea to know if the builder or you are responsible for materials delivered to the site . Also , a dwelling policy should be created to the new total value of the improvements and original structure on either a replacement cost or actual cash value basis . I suggest replacement cost . Insurance to value is important even on this type of policy . Carriers using the dwelling form of coverage will pro-rate valuation to an average state of completion for premium calculation , but valuation at the time of loss is also tricky so keep good records so you can rebuild the entire structure after a major loss . Cleaning up the concepts here also makes it necessary to make sure that the contractor has general liability and workers compensation insurance . If they have vehicles that operate on the property you should also insist that they provide evidence of vehicle insurance . In every instance above , you should be listed as an `` additional insured '' and `` certificate holder '' during the performance of the construction tasks . If possible , ask them to waive subrogation . Get evidence in writing . A commonly used form is the `` Acord 25 '' Certification of Liability Insurance form and this is commonly provided ask for and get written evidence of coverage as noted above .
The actual pipes -LRB- Plumbing -RRB- from leaking or bursting is excluded on a homeowners policy . However the damage the burst caused the dwelling could be covered . In the case of a leak coverage would be more difficult to determine if the leak has been occurring over a long period of time . A water main is usually away from the house so the chances of damage to the dwelling are low . The big question to ask is `` Was there any damage to the dwelling '' ? . If there is no damage to the dwelling you can immediately figure out there is no claim to be made . Leaks in general are just part of common maintenance of a homeowner . Always contact to agent to discuss the details of your particular situation to help determine if there is coverage for a water main leak .
Home Insurance , Hazard Insurance or Property Insurance are synonymous general terms . 1 - 4 unit homes are usually protected by a Homeowners Insurance Policy -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy -LRB- Tenant Occupied -RRB- . The Homeowners Insurance Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Personal Property , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others most commonly written on Form HO-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . The Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Loss of Rent , and Premises Liabilitymost commonly written on Form DP-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
New York Homeowners Insurance cost will depend on what is being insured . Home Insurance covers the replacement cost of the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal liability and medical payments to others . The age , size and construction characteristics of the home will dictate the reconstruction cost which will be used as the Dwelling Coverage Amount . If you are looking for a lower premium than generated , we would recommend selecting a higher deductible option . The deductible does not apply to Liability and Medical Payment claims ; however , it is the amount deducted from a loss payout for physical loss to the dwelling , other structures and/or personal property as covered on the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy New York Home Insurance online ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
In general , Homeowners Insurance premiums , like all insurance premiums , reflect the amount of risk that the insurance company has determined there to be and their loss and cost experience with these risks . There are many factors that are included in rate development within the above mentioned categories . A couple of examples can be the home 's location in relation to a fire department and hydrant . Homeowners policies , for the most part , include some form of an `` inflation guard '' provision meaning that the dwelling amount will be adjusted each renewal to reflect increased costs due to inflation . Substantial renovations on a home can markedly increase the replacement value of that home and as the dwelling amount increases , so too would the proportional premium . Talk to your insurance professional about your deductible options as well as any discount opportunities in order to manage any increases .
Talk to your iInsurance Professional about your specific needs , but in general , there are a few basic factors that will affect both coverage and pricing on a Homeowners ' policy . After an accurate address and location , probably the most obvious , is the dwelling coverage amount . This can be determined accurately by completing a Reconstruction Analysis . Once the dwelling amount is established , other factrrs are included namely proximity to a hydrant and fire services , age of the dwelling , additional security elements like alarm systems etc. . Pricing is also affected if you insure your cars with the same company because some nice discounts may apply .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Short answer is the amount that is correct to adequately cover your Home , Personal Property and Liability exposure . The primary element of a Homeowners policy from which most of your premium is driven is , of course , the stated Dwelling Amount . Thjis is not an arbetrary number , but should be based upon the carefulinspection of your home and the completion of a Reconstruction Analysis . Your Insurance professional can work with you and make the proper recommendation . Once that is determined , the stated Personal Property coverage amount will become a percentage of the Dwelling amount . Finally , choose the amount of Liability coverage that best suits your financial exposure as this is protection against any possible action or inaction for which you may be held legally liable .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Get My Own Car Insurance At 17 ?
You may be able to with a small number of carriers , but based on my education and experience in the industry up to this point I would say the you would not be able to secure your own insurance coverage at seventeen . The legally recognized age for being an adult is currently eighteen which means that if you are not eighteen then someone else is responsible for you until you turn eighteen .
This is not always the case there are some carriers that actually give you young driver discount and also if you have good grades that help . The main reason it is higher is because you are less experienced driver and are more likely to have an accident but there are many factors for this . Also the type of car you drive makes a difference also . I insure a 17 yr old who is on her own policy and has had tickets and drives a 2 door car and with just liability is only $ 160 a month that is not a bad rate as here inMontana the average young driver you can figures is 100 a month before you even think about adding a car this is being added to another policy . My recommendations are to talk to a local agent and see what type of discounts they offer for younger drivers and if you are being listed on another persons policy or not .
This one 's pretty simple if you have a good agent with a well trained staff . Simply call them up and tell them you 're replacing a car . To make sure they have everything they need have this information : Year , make and model of new car Full 17 digit VIN When you got your new car When you got rid of your old car Talk about the coverage you want : Comp & Collision ? Deductibles Anything special added to the car If it 's financed or leased , they 'll need to know the name , address , and loan or lease number of the finance or leasing company How you 'd like to receive your certificate of insurance Also at this time , it might be a good idea to ask what the premiums will be so you can budget for it . If you have n't sold your old car yet , do n't take the coverage off it . This is important . If you let someone test drive your car and they get in an accident or hurt someone , you want to be sure your covered . The premium you 'll pay for that short period of time is worth it .
Not really ... It all depends on the carrier you are with , but with our carriers we do n't see a significant price break at age 18 . We see a more significant break in the mid 20 's . Many carriers consider those that are 18 , 19 or in the eraly 20 's and still being `` young '' drivers and price them accordingly . Every year you get further away from the true young driver age of 16 or 17 , you get a little help onthe pricing but its not generally a lot to get excited about . Contact your local independant agent and have them run some pricing comaprisons for with different companies . If you are 17 now , ask them to run estimates on what your premiums -LRB- at today 's rates -RRB- may look like as you get older .
The easy answer for this would be `` Anyone you give permission to drive your vehicle . '' The exception to this would be anyone who is specifically excluded from your insurance policy . For example , a client of mine has a 17 year old son . Their son had a valid learners permit and went through the process of completing Drivers Ed , but never took the final exam and was never issued a license . Even though his permit has expired , based on his age and the fact that he had a permit , I recommended to my client they included him on their policy , but list him as an excluded driver . Because he is excluded , the insurance company does not rate him on the policy , and the premium did not increase . Outside of their son , anyone they give permission to drive their car would be covered , even if the person who borrowed the vehicle did not have their own insurance policy . You do run the risk of increased monthly premium payments should an uninsured driver borrow your car with your permission and be involved in an accident where they are liable however . So be careful of who and how often you do lend your vehicle out .
There is no set cost for adding a car to your existing auto insurance policy . Many factors come into play such as the value of the car , desired coverage limits , historical claims costs for the particular vehicle , historical claims frequency of the particular car , safety and anti-theft features . A quick call into your insurance professional , preferably with the 17-digit vehicle identification number , can get you the added cost in seconds .
Teen drivers are among the most expensive to insure , because they have the most tickets and accidents . A 17 year old can reduce her auto insurance by 1 -RRB- comparing prices , 2 -RRB- buying an older car that does not need comprehensive and collision -LRB- full coverage -RRB- , and 3 -RRB- by driving fewer miles in a year . Some kinds of cars are more dangerous and therefore more expensive to insure , so make sure you check insurance rates before you purchase a vehicle . A teen driver may also be excluded from having an insurance policy on his own , so it usually makes sense to join a family policy . You would also want to take advantage of any multi-car or multi-line discounts offered by your insurance company . These would be the same way that any driver can reduce her insurance rates , but for the teen driver it is particularly important to follow these steps . In addition , a clean driving record is paramount . So drive carefully and those rates will go down over time .
In most states a 17 year old individual can not obtain health insurance on their own . They can be added as a dependent to their parents plan . A few states do offer `` child only '' health insurance plans but most do n't . Prior to Obamacare any child under 19 could have their own policy .
In Minnesota , none of the standard insurers will write stand alone health coverage on a 17 year old . However , the Minnesota Comprehensive Health Association - which has long been in existencespecificallyto provide real health insurance coverage for those who can not obtain it in the standard market - would accept the 17 year old .
People who participate in high risk activities or have impaired health conditions often are charged much higher premiums for life insurance , whether they are applying for term or permanent coverage . The price that you pay is determined by your age , the requested amount of coverage , and risk classification . If the carrier offers a substandard/table-rating for the coverage , the premiums will usually be based off of the standard risk class with an extra 25 % increase for each extra letter assigned -LRB- the 25 % figure can vary by carrier - e.g. some may use 17 % , etc. -RRB- . For example , a Table B rating would cost the standard rate plus 50 % -LRB- B = 2 tables -RRB- , a Table D rating would cost double the standard rate -LRB- D = 4 tables -RRB- , etc. . Insurance companies may also look at assigning a flat extra rating with a specified cost per thousand dollars of insurance -LRB- such as $ 5.00 per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- . Flat extras may be applied for only a few years , or for the life of the policy and are more commonly assigned for high-risk activities . Table-ratings are more commonly given for high-risk health conditions . I often also see many people just apply for a bunch of companies at the same time because they 're a high-risk individual . DO NOT do this ! . Applying for coverage with more than one company at the same time could hurt your chances of securing a policy . It is in your best interest to find out before applying what the most likely offer will be from 10-15 different companies so that you know what to expect and know that you are getting the best possible offer . I highly recommend working with an independent agent who can look at multiple companies for you - trying to get that information can be very difficult to do on your own . This is the exact field my group specializes in and would be happy to be of assistance with your program .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
For personally-owned policies , life insurance death benefits paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary are received income tax free - a unique and important benefit . If the beneficiary is a business and that business owned the policy , the business is generally not subject to the regular corporate federal income tax on the death proceeds provided special requirements are satisfied for policies issued or materially modified since August 17 , 2006 -RRB- .
Life Insurance is usually designed based on need . The recovery or protection against a lost asset or income , preservation of your estate from taxes , etc. . The need for children to have life insurance falls into 2 categories : burial expenses ... I recently lost my son , 17 , which we had coverage on him as a child rider , $ 10k which paid for the service/cremation , and the lost income from a month out of work . As a gift . As the cost of insurance is low for children , you can set up a life insurance policy designed to build cash value to use later in life . You not only have the benefit of the death benefit , but more so the benefit of using the life insurance as an asset to draw from in the future . With the compounding you get , the growth can be substantial if designed correctly .
For personally-owned policies , life insurance death benefits paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary are received income tax free - a unique and important benefit . If the beneficiary is a business and that business owned the policy , the business is generally not subject to the regular corporate federal income tax on the death proceeds provided special requirements are satisfied for policies issued or materially modified since August 17 , 2006 -RRB- . Policy cash values grow tax-deferred . If the policy is fully surrendered for its cash value , the amount in excess of basis -LRB- premiums paid less withdrawals taken -RRB- is gain and would be income taxable to the policyowner . This is a high level , general overview for insurance planning purposes and may not be used as tax advice . For tax advice you should seek the services of a tax professional .
Need cheap car insurance at age 17 ? One of the most important things to do is to shop and compare different rates from multiple carriers . Prices can vary by as much as 50 % , depending on the insurer that you are using . Utilize all discounts , including good student , multi-policy and any other offered reductions . A broker will handle all of this for you at no cost . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated auto insurance websites .
First , speaking from personal experience , my son committed suicide @ age 17 . The benefit paid for funeral costs and time away from work which is more than you might think . Second , you can get as much as $ 50k for $ 4 per month which is a great gift of life to provide to your children when they become adults . Keeping this simple , no one depends on a baby so be sure to have adequate coverage on yourself as the parents . Let me know if you have any questions .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
Let me start by saying that Medigap isnt the same as Part B but lets get a better understanding of how Medicare works . If you look at page 17 of the 2015 Medicare and You book you will see there are 2 main choices on how you can get your Medicare coverage . There is Original Medicare that includes Part A and B with the option to fill in the gaps in Original Medicare by buying a Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Or there is Medicare Advantage Plan , Part C , which include Part A , Part B and in most cases Part D. On page 92 of the Medicare and You book you will find that all Medigap policies are standardized . All polices offer that same basic benefits but different insurance companies may charge you different premiums for the same exact policy . Its a good idea to use a good broker that represents multi companies that can show you not only the price difference but also the average rate increases because all Medigap policies go up every year . Now there are different Medigap plans A-N , the easiest way to think about this is like car insurance . You can buy a car insurance policy with no deductible but by doing so your premium will be higher . If you choose to assume some of the risk , buying a policy with a deductible your premium will be lower . As long as youre in fairly good health -LRB- no major illnesses or recent hospitalization with in the last 2 years -RRB- you can show the market for the lowest price , remember Medigap plans always have a price increase each year and its always a wise decision to shop around every couple of years to find the best price . I am aware of one insurance company that once you are approved , will allow you to change between plans without re-looking at your current health , which may be a viable option if you want to save money with a higher deductible while you are in good health and then when your health starts to change you change your plan to a lower deductible . If you have any other question feel free to contact me for a phone review or we can chat on Skype .
In most cases , life insurance proceeds , the death benefit , are received income tax free by the beneficiary in most cases . This is a key feature of life insurance . Common exceptions include business-owned life insurance issued , or materially modified , after August 17 , 2006 which may be taxable unless specific steps are taken during time of application and annually thereafter to meet conditions which allow the proceeds to be income tax-free . Another exception is a tax trap where life insurance contracts with three parties involved may also have unexpected taxable implications .
Life insurance proceeds , the death benefit , are generally received income tax free by the beneficiary in most cases . This is a key feature of life insurance . Common exceptions include business-owned life insurance issued , or materially modified , after August 17 , 2006 which may be taxable unless specific steps are taken during time of application and annually thereafter to meet conditions which allow the proceeds to be income tax-free . Another exception is a tax trap where life insurance contracts with three parties involved may also have unexpected taxable implications .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Does My Child Need Life Insurance ?
I agree with Tim that one can not really say a child `` needs '' life insurance . But when they are adults , they may need life insurance to cover financial obligations , and be unable to get it because of a health condition . Getting life insurance while they are young and healthy ensures that they will have a policy when it is needed . Even just adding a small child rider to your policy will enable them to have 5 times that amount when they become an adult .
Life insurance for children is a great plan . The younger the better . The younger they are , past about 2 weeks old , the rates are extremely low . Ridiculously low in fact . This will guarantee their insurability for the rest of their lives . Get a permanent policy and they can be covered until they die , at that same very low rate . And they even borrow against it for college or retirement , or other needs , and keep the money tax free . It is an incredible deal ! Thank you . GARY LANE .
That is a great question ! I can give you three reasons why it makes sense to have life insurance on your child . The first is that unfortunately , children die also . Unless you have the money to cover funeral costs , a very inexpensive policy can be a financial lifesaver . The second is that children can often develop health issues that would prevent , or make prohibitively expensive , getting a policy . Anything that leaves the child requiring home health care is enough to get them declined by many companies . The third is for financial security . Many companies will allow the increasing of the face value at points along the child 's life , and there is a cash value that grows along with the child . The right policy can ensure a good chunk of change is available if needed one day . I have policies on my kids , if that helps . If you would like to discuss this more , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
I am not sure I would say that a child needs life insurance . There are two main reasons to insure a child , one is financial savings and the other is protecting insurability . Writing a whole life or universal life policy , or cash value plan , on a child has advantages to be able to save extra money for college , a first home or even retirement . The premiums are very affordable and with the right plan can have a good guaranteed rate of return on investment . The second reason is protect the child 's insurability . If you purchase life insurance on a child most all companies have a conversion clause which means the child can convert to higher face amounts , five , ten or greater times the original death benefit without proof of insurability . If the child had a diagnosis in later life and became uninsurable then they would have this policy at a very reasonable rate for the rest of their life .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Does your child need life insurance ? Well there will be an answer for everybody and they may not be the same . I purchased life insurance on my children . Here are a few reasons why ... . if one of my children were to die , I do n't think I would be able to go straight back to work on Monday as if nothing happened . I would n't want to have the price of the headstone and service costs get into the pain my wife and I would be experiencing . Imagine telling your wife `` that costs too much '' for the headstone she wants for your child . I also bought for positive reasons too . I purchased whole life so they have permanent insurance working hard at a low cost for them . They have solid cash values and life insurance to take into adulthood .
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
In what way do you mean ? As a college funding choice , possibly , but it would require significant investment that might be better spent on the parents to insure college . A life insurance policy on a child is a good idea for several reasons . Set up properly it is a financial cornerstone to a sound financial portfolio beginning for a child as they grow into adulthood . Imagine locking in a price that is extremely low and having it gain in value over the years into adulthood . Add the option of guaranteed insurability to the plan and you 've taken away the ability for an insurance company to say `` no '' to your child in the future . That is extremely valuable . Now , let 's look at the sad side of insurance on a child . What if you need it ? As heartbreaking as it would be to lose a child , imagine having to figure out what you can `` afford '' for a service or headstone ? Imagine how much time you 'll need off of work and what your employer would cover salary wise ? For the same reason I purchased insurance as a young single man , long before I went into this business , I did n't want a double or triple whammy for my parents who would already be dealing with my death . Throw lost wages in there and having to find the money to bury me and I 've created devastation in my household . While may God forbid , if you were to lose a child , is n't that enough ?
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
A child is not an economic unit . Quite the opposite , however , the loss of a child can have a financial impact on the family . This is rarely the motivation for the purchase of life insurance on a child but if you drive the city streets often you will see people asking for donations to help bury a child . It is sad but it does happen . Most people who purchase life insurance on a child are trying to secure coverage for a lifetime at an early age in order to set a very low premium for the coverage and to avoid the possibility that the child might become uninsurable in the future . My brother became uninsurable at about age 22 . This is an issue that concerns many . Life insurance plans are often seen as savings vehicles to accumulate money for future requirements . It is probably not the best way to save money for a college education but it does provide a systematic way to set aside money and for that money to grow free of current taxation . The life insurance policies available to children often have a rider that allows the child to purchase additional life insurance at specific times in the future without proving evidence of insurability . This can be extremely important .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
Why buy whole life for a child ? Well I guess I can tell you why I bought whole life for my kids . In no particular order or rank , I bought whole life because that is the cheapest if will ever be , those policies will become cornerstones of their financial lives . Much like buying a piece of property they now have something to build on . They have future guaranteed insurability with these policies as well What that means is they ca n't be told `` no '' by the insurance company , even if they are no longer insurable . Sort of like a stock option . And finally for this post if either of my kids were to die before me I would be devastated . I would be crushed as I have great kids . So insurance on them would help me get through their passing by paying bills that still need to be paid . I am planning for their future living with these policies and accepting the aspect of the possibility of their early passing and the help they would provide . I could never imagine having an argument with a spouse over what headstone to buy . Whole life on a child is an investment in their future , not just their death .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
A child rider on Term life insurance adds life insurance to your policy that will cover your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . It is usually available to children age 15 days to approx age 17 -LRB- the age varies by company -RRB- . You select a face amount of the child rider , usually between $ 5,000 and $ 25,000 . This that would pay if a tragedy occurred in your family , and you lost one or more of your children . The child rider benefit would pay that entire amount for each deceased child . The rider pays for death by any reason , just as your policy does , with the exception of suicide in first two years , or if your child had a serious health condition that was not disclosed on the application and death occurred during the first two years of purchasing the rider . If your child has type 1 diabetes , intellectual disability , or other maladies , unfortunately , they will not be able to be on the rider.Therefore , it is good to get the rider while your first child is young ; then the rest are automatically added . While few children pass away , the real value of a child rider can come when your child turns approx 25 -LRB- again , the age varies by company -RRB- . At that time the child rider can usually be changed to a permanent life insurance policy of about 5 times the face amount of the child rider . They do not ask any health questions , so if your child developed an illness after being put on the rider , it will not matter . They will then have a reasonably priced life insurance policy for the rest of their lives .
Why should you buy coverage for a new baby ? Well three basic reasons may apply as to `` why '' ? First , if you were to lose your child , what would you do ? Would you go into work on Monday ? Would you and your spouse agree on the cost of the service and headstone ? Sorry to be blunt . A life insurance policy lets you take a breath , decide on your service and reduces the `` what can we afford to do ? '' in the situation . Second , you can purchase guaranteed insurability for your child 's future when you build your policy . These options take away the insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child 's future purchases , no matter their health . Finally , depending on your choice of policy , you get your child a foothold in their financial future . You are knocking out one of the foundation pieces to a financial future while the price is super cheap . One of many things down , more choices for other dollars later .
The more accurate question is why do parents want to take out life insurance on their infant child ? You may want to cover final expenses in the death of the child . You may want to start a long term savings program for your child . You may want to purchase the maximum the carrier allows for the future of your childs insurability , especially if your familys health history includes chronic illnesses . But keep in mind , most life insurance carriers will not issue a policy on a child if the parents have no coverage of their own .
end question
start question
annuities
Does Fidelity Offer Annuities ?
Yes , Fidelity does offer a line of annuity products . They have fixed , immediate and deferred annuities ; then also offer variable annuities to their customers through another carrier . Fidelity advertises their annuities on their website as being good for retirement savings , retirement income , and both retirement savings and retirement income .
Yes , Fidelity does offer a line of annuity products . They have fixed , immediate and deferred annuities ; then also offer variable annuities to their customers through another carrier . Fidelity advertises their annuities on their website as being good for retirement savings , retirement income , and both retirement savings and retirement income .
Fidelity Life Association offers individual life insurance products including LifeStory Term , Hybrid Life , Rapid Decision Express , Rapid Decision Universal Life , Rapid Decision Mortgage Term , Rapid Decision Senior Term and Whole Life , and Accidental Death Benefit . Most of these do not require an exam . Contact a website that offers Fidelity Life quotes in the list of quotes to talk to an agent that sells Fidelity Life Association insurance prodcuts .
Yes , Fidelity does sell annuities and carries some very competitive products with lots of interesting features . They sell immediate annuities , deferred annuities , and fixed annuities . To compare the rates and features of Fidelity annuities with those issued by other companies , contact an insurance agency that sells annuities through several companies .
Hybrid Term life insurance is Term Life insurance has a second type of insurance combined with it . E.g. . A Hybrid Term Life policy might be a blend of traditional Term insurance combined with Accidental Death or long term care benefits . Fidelity Life offers a Hybrid Term Life insurance policy that allows you to get nearly instant Life coverage combined with Accidental Death coverage . Then after you take an exam , the policy becomes 100 % traditional Life coverage . Hybrid life insurance can be a good way to get two types of coverage in one policy at a lower price than if both were purchased separately . Or as in the case of Fidelity Hybrid Term insurance , it can be a way to get quick coverage at a reasonable price , and be able to take your time in changing it over to a pure Term Life policy .
Hybrid Life Insurance refers to a type of policy that is a blend of two types of coverage . E.g. . A blend of Term and Whole Life , or Term and Universal Life , or Universal Life and Long Term Care . Hybrid Term Life is also the name of a policy offered by Fidelity Life . It starts out as a blend of Life and Accidental Death coverage , then changes to all Life insurance after the Insured person takes an exam within 6 months . The advantage of starting out with the hybrid policy -LRB- which goes into effect almost immediately -RRB- , vs binding coverage with other policies , is that the Insured gets to keep the policy regardless of whether or not they are approved for the pure Life policy later . In fact , the Insured could have a heart attack or be diagnosed with cancer and still get to keep that blend of Life and Accidental Death that is not graded . Another advantage can be for those who need something quick . E.g. . They are going on a trip , or need a policy to satisfy a divorce decree , or get a loan , or to wait until their blood pressure medication kicks in . If they do go on to get the pure Life policy , the rates are quite competitive with other medically underwritten policies . The only downside I see with Fidelity 's Hybrid Term Life Insurance is that it is hard to explain and understand .
The rate of return of annuities really depends on what type of annuity you are talking about . Fixed Annuities have a set base rate similar to a CD , they pay a guaranteed rates of interest . If you are looking for a fixed annuity make sure you shop around some companies like Fidelity & Guaranty Life and Guaranty Income Life are raising their base rates . When you are looking at Index Annuities the insurance company gives you a guaranteed minimum interest rate and also a crediting strategy like the S&P 500 or something like that . Think of it this way there are two buckets of money , the first has your money with the guaranteed interest rate , the second has your money linked to the crediting strategy of the market . If the market goes up they will credit that bucket with interest -LRB- every company has different participation rates and caps -RRB- . If the market is down then that bucket will earn no interest . When ever you want to start drawing an income , the insurance company will see which bucket has the most money and that bucket will be used for income . If you work with a good broker , they have software that will show you what your investment will look like with all of the companies . Please let me know if I can help in any way .
It truly depends on your occupation and your medical history . For high risk jobs , a sub-standard carry like Lloyds of London or Fidelity offers great products . If you 're a physician , Standard , Principal or MetLife can offer very competitive rates . If you 're considering purchasing DI , ask your agent to shop around and provide you with multiple quotes . Remember , just because it 's the cheapest , does n't mean it 's the best !
Yes , Fidelity sells life insurance through Fidelity Life Association . The company was established in 1896 as a fraternal benefit society in the state of Illinois . They are licensed to sell life insurance in all the states except Washington and New York . They sell to both individuals and groups . Their products include Term , Universal , and Whole Life Insurance , many of which do not require an exam .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
There are many different types of life insurance policies , and each life insurance company offers the type of coverage that best fits their goals , operations , finances , and customers . E.g. North American Company for Life and Health offers many competitive annuities and IUL products , whereas Fidelity Life specializes in No Exam policies . Some have a medical staff that makes them more suited for persons with serious health conditions , whereas others reject most health conditions and optimize their coverage for those with preferred health . That is why it is helpful to use an agency where you can shop from many different companies , or better yet , let that agency do it for you . After all the years it has taken me to learn what is best for different situations , I do n't see how anyone can do it on their own . However , websites and online quote engines can give you a start so that you can go into the shopping experience with some ideas of what you might need and want .
The Cheapest Home Insurance may be perceived to be the lowest cost per thousand dollars of insurance . The lowest premium for Homeowners Insurance is offered by Stillwater Insurance Group , formerly known as Fidelity National Insurance Group . Stillwater Insurance is Admitted in all 50 States and writes in the majority of the Cities in the nation ; it offers a quality homeowners product with many available options and discounts . They provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
I am not an employee of Bank of America but yes just like most banks today they do sell life insurance and annuities . BoA has subsidiary life insurance companies through Merrill Lynch , General Fidelity Life Insurance Company , Meritplan Insurance Company and Newport Insurance Company . Even now some insurance companies now have banks .
A number of companies offer Cancer plans . To name a few , Standard Life and Accident , Bankers Fidelity , Bankers Life , Washington National , Sterling Life , and many more . If you are looking for a cancer plan call a good independent life insuance agent who can help you find a good plan that fits your needs and budget .
Please note that disability insurance underwriting is not the same as it once was . Most carriers now offer simplified underwriting , meaning a client under a certain age -LRB- usually 50 -RRB- can apply for DI without having to submit financials or a paramedical exam . They might still request medical records , but that 's only if substantial medical history is listed on an application . Also , do n't forget that occupations that are difficult to place can more often than not be placed through Lloyds of London or Fidelity .
Bankers Life is not an insurance policy it is the name of a company . There are actually several companies that include Bankers Life as part of their name . Bankers Life and Casualty is the largest . There is also Bankers Fidelity and others but when people say Bankers Life they are usually referring to Bankers Life and Casualty .
There are many well known insurance companies that sell disability insurance both short and long term . Perhaps you may know Metlife , Assurity , Principal Mutual , Guardian , Mass Mutual or Fidelity Insurance Group . Even the big reinsurer Lloyds of Loudon sell disability insurance . For short term disability plans there are a few most would recognize like AFLAC , Colonial and Combine .
There are several good disability companies in the market place , but each contract has it 's own definitions , so the policy language is very important to understand in determining your benefits . Ameritas , , Assurity , Fidelity Security , Illinois Mutual , Lloyd 's of London , Mass Mutual , Metlife , United of Omaha and The Standard are the top brokerage carriers in disability insurance .
There are several disability insurance companies worthy of your consideration : Ameritas , Assurity , Fidelity Security , Illinois Mutual , Lloyds of London , Mass Mutual , MetLife , Mutual of Omaha , Principle and The Standard . Everyones personal needs will dictate which company to use , but the overall selection is The Standard with the Principle a close second .
There are many disability insurance companies available in the U.S. market . In the brokerage distribution channel Standard of Oregon , Principle , Met Life , Assurity , Illinois Mutual , Lloyd 's of London , Mutual of Omaha , Fidelity and Lloyds of London . In the career channel there is Mass Mutual and Guardian . There are others , but these are the players in disability insurance .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Sheds ?
Yes , typically unless there is an exclusion written into your policy . Most homeowners policies provide up to ten percent of the policy amount for other structures . If you have a shed that is worth more than ten percent of the policy value then you will want to have your agent secure more coverage for the building through a policy endorsement . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
If a fallen tree , whether your own or your neighbors , has landed in your yard , on car or on your home , you are likely wondering whether your current homeowners insurance policy will cover the repair costs . Damage to your home and its contents , regardless of whether the trees origin was from your own property or a neighboring , is covered under a homeowners policy . For property such as sheds , additions or detached garages , there is generally a maximum amount of coverage offered for fallen tree damage -LRB- i.e. 10 % of your entire propertys value -RRB- . Even though your homeowners insurance policy will cover damage resulting from fallen trees , it is important to keep in mind that you are financially responsible for any applicable policy deductible . For example , if your homeowners insurance policy has a $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 deductible and the total cost of repairs is $ 25,000 , you will be required to pay either $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 out of pocket for the clean-up to be completed . If the fallen tree was from your neighbors yard , it is possible that your insurance company will attempt to get their policy to cover the cost of the damage . In this event , you may be refunded any deductible you paid for the repairs .
In short , the answer is yes . But it needs to be clarified whether you are asking for property damage to the pool itself or liability coverage . Both would be covered barring any specific pool exclusions , which I am not aware of any in the standard market . If someone were to get injured while swimming in the pool , yes , your homeowners policy should cover you for liability . Likewise , if you pool is damaged due to the standard homeowners causes of loss less any standard exclusions then the pool would be covered for property damage to the pool itself . Keep in mind that wear and tear would not be covered under your policy . So if your pool liner rips `` just because '' or the concrete foundation cracks , those would be considered wear and tear . Please note that many insurance carriers are very cautious when writing homeowners insurance on homes that have pools . Some do not like to write them with a pool exposure , some do not mind , so be sure to ask your agent how it might affect your current coverage and future coverage and what the premium impact might be . You also want to strongly consider higher liability limits in purchasing an umbrella or if you already have an umbrella policy then higher umbrella limits . It might cost you $ 150 for each additional $ 1 mil limit . Lastly , if you have a pool and want to make sure you are covered for the proper limits , make sure your coverage B -LRB- other structures -RRB- limit is sufficient to cover any losses to your pool and any other structures i.e. detached garages , sheds as well .
A homeowners policy is a package . As such it reduces costs by combining coverages that are normally required in such a way as to satisfy the majority of customers . The dwelling extension is included in most homeowners policies because so many people have detached garages , sheds and similar structures . It is possible to cobble together a unique policy for you that does not include that coverage ; however , the cost will probably be higher .
Yes , homeowners insurance covers the structure , foundation , and roof -LRB- unless excluded in your policy -RRB- for covered perils . Most standard home insurance policies will come with coverage for additional structures as well -LRB- shed , detached garage , guest house , etc. -RRB- . The policy covers the cost to rebuild from ground up , as long as the damage occurred from a covered peril .
Most policies cover other structures including a shed , garage or barn for the same perils as the home . The amount of coverage is usually around 10 % of the dwelling , so a home insured for $ 100,000 would have coverage on the shed of about $ 10,000 . Evey company has minor differences so make sure you check you policy or ask your agent to review the particulars of your policy .
The amount of homeowners insurance you need on your home depends on many different factors . It is important to speak with an agent regarding your specific situation . Typically a homeowners insurance policy will cover the replacement cost of your home , any additional structures including a shed or fence , your personal property , additional expenses is case you are not able to live in your home , and some liability coverage . There are other additional coverages that may be recommended to you depending on your specific situation . It is best to speak with an agent who can help you understand what you need .
Other structures on your homeowners policy would typically be out buildings such as sheds . Most homeowners policy 's provide up to ten percent of the policy valuation for this type of coverage less your policy deductible . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Homeowners Insurance typically includes coverage for your actual home -LRB- the Dwelling Coverage -RRB- , coverage for separate structures -LRB- such as detached garage or shed -RRB- , coverage for your belongings -LRB- both the items inside your home , as well as items that may be outside of the home -RRB- , liability protection -LRB- coverage that protects you if you are sued -RRB- , and medical payment coverage -LRB- an amount thatcan paid to someone that is injured on your property -RRB- . These 5 items are usually included in any homeowners policy -LRB- renters and landlord policies have variations of these -RRB- . However , some insurance companies also include some extras at no additional cost . For instance , Farmers Insurance includes an extended coverage of 125 % of the dwelling coverage . This means that if the cost to rebuild the home exceeds the amount of dwelling coverage , Farmers Insurance will cover an extra 25 % over and above the dwelling coverage . Farmers Insurance also includes ID theft protection , and a few other extras .
There are three basic coverages in a homeowners policy . There is coverage for the principle property -LRB- the home and the contents of the home . -RRB- There is coverage for incidental property -LRB- things outside the home but on the property , sheds , gazebos , etc. -RRB- and liability coverage . The contents are covered as a part of the principle property coverage and the limit is normally a percentage of the insured value of the house .
The term ` Dwelling Extension ' in a homeowner policy is also commonly expressed as ` Other Structures ' . The amount of property insurance listed under Coverage B on your policy is usually 10 % of the amount of insurance you have chosen for the main structure - Coverage A . The Dwelling Extension or Other Structures feature covers all structures that are are either attached to your home , as with a connected garage or otherwise situated on the property , such as separate storage shed , gazebo , etc. . The 10 % can be increased based upon your needs .
It may , at least in part , cover this . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . Policies can provide for coverage so long as the tree has fallen and caused damage to real property , for example , your house or storage shed . In cases such as this , the policy would pay to remove the tree andrepair the damage to the affected property and for the cutting up and removal of the debris . This would however all be subject to your Homeowners ' deductible and the coverage provided may be limited to a specific dollar amount .
Home insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . Home insurance is not a maintenance policy and it does not cover long term damage or wear and tear . Home insurance provides coverage for your dwelling , other structures -LRB- fence , shed ect . -RRB- , personal property and liability coverage . There are several optional coverages available including Water/Sewer Backup , Law and Ordinance , Earthquake , ect . You also want to make sure you purchase a Replacement Cost policy which will provide full value for your home , not a depreciated amount .
In many cases , Homeowners ' Insurance policies will extend coverage to other structures on your property and this would include a shed . As your Insurance Professional about this coverage in your policy and about any limitations that may be involved . Usually the coverage is limited to 10 % of the current dwelling amount and of course subject to your property deductible .
Most homeowners policies include coverage for other structures . Other structures typically are defined small buildings on your property like sheds . The amount of coverage can vary but many carriers provide up to ten percent of the homes coverage value for these . If you have a structure that is of higher value then you may wish to have an endorsement added to your policy to provide the proper level of coverage for the structure .
Typically a homeowners policy has several sections called coverages . The first coverage is for the residence itself . The second coverage is for related private structures located on the property , such as a shed , fence or swimming pool . The third coverage is personal property and that is commonly called , contents . The fourth coverage is for additional living costs and loss of rents should the residence become unfit for use . The next coverage is normally personal liability which covers you if you are sued for bodily injury or property damage . The next coverage is medical payments to others and provides limited medical care to an invited visitor who is hurt on your property . There are other incidental coverages .
Extensions of coverage are extended from limits built into the package of homeowner coverages . If you are referring to coverage `` B '' - other structures , this coverage is built in based on an antiquated coverage model where there was often a separate structure . Today , a separate structure may include utility sheds , decks , light poles and fences since garages are often attached . If you have none of these ask your carrier or agent if they can add this coverage to coverage `` A '' - Dwelling . I know of at least one carrier who has done this . Others may allow you to use the limit to protect against under-insurance after a loss .
Yes , typically unless there is an exclusion written into your policy . Most homeowners policies provide up to ten percent of the policy amount for other structures . If you have a shed that is worth more than ten percent of the policy value then you will want to have your agent secure more coverage for the building through a policy endorsement . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Can I Find Out If Someone Has A Life Insurance Policy ?
The first place that you can check is Policy Locator Service through the Medical Information Bureau . MIB Group , Inc is a cooperative data exchange formed by the North American life insurance industry in 1909 . There is a cost associated with the search but it will return results via mail with a list of queries by insurance companies for underwriting on the search subject , from whenever they were `` shopped '' for insurance . Keep in mind , that this is not 100 % inclusive for all insurers . The search form is located here WEBSITELINK Secondly , through some sleuthing using either the above list or my following list of suggestions , you should contact the insurers on your target list , in order to verify the active policies . Where to search : - Credit card and bank statements : Go back through the insured 's financial records and look for periodic payments to insurers , whether it be on a monthly , quarterly , semi-annual or annual basis . This should indicate who the insurer is/was based upon where the money is paid to . - Banks , Credit Unions , Credit card companies : Often times , many banks , lenders and credit companies offer group policies for their account holders for as little as $ 1,000.00 of coverage and higher amounts based upon certain requirements . Check with these groups to see if they had offered any of these products at any point in time . - Pay stubs/Employers and Benefits companies : Many employers offer a basic life or AD&D policy to full time employees for free as well as inexpensive group policies . Deductions for the premium payments on the group policies may be found on the insured 's pay stub . However , many times , this coverage is only active when the insured is employed . - Split Dollar/Executive Compensation plans : Some employers taking advantage of tax regulations , used life insurance to pay benefits to key employees which may have also been part of Supplemental Exec Retirement Plans -LRB- SERP -RRB- . Verify with the insured 's former employers if any plan existed . - Unions , Pensions and Fraternal organizations : Many Unions and Pension funds may have a small paid-up policy on the insured as part of their benefits package . The same goes for Fraternal organizations including Knights of Columbus , Elks , Masons , etc. . Many times the search is no easy task however , after a bit of detective work and dedication , you may uncover a handful of forgotten or unknown small policies , where the cumulative benefit adds up and more than justifies the search !
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Find a good local experienced independent agent in your area who can sit down with you , discuss your needs and goals and help you find the plan that is affordable for you . Do not bow to high pressure sales tactics . Find someone you are comfortable with . You may want to interview a few agents before deciding on the one you want to do business with . A good agent will be looking out for YOUR interests . Find someone who has been in the business for a while , who knows the plans and options available to you .
A life insurance policy could be denied for any of the following reasons : 1 -RRB- The applicant 's health was not controlled . This can be anything from someone with diabetes having an A1C over 10 , to someone with cancer having only months to live . 2 -RRB- The applicant 's health has not been stable for a certain length of time . This can range from someone who had very high blood pressure and only been on medication for one month , to someone with MS who has had a recent major exacerbation . 3 -RRB- The applicant is planning to have major medical testing or procedure done in the near future . In other words , if your doctor has scheduled a test to see if you have Parkinson 's , you will need to wait until after the test to apply . If you have gastric bypass surgery scheduled in two months , the insurance company will ask that you wait until after your surgery to apply . 4 -RRB- The applicant has had a recent bankruptcy that has not been discharged , has undergone recent drug or alcohol treatment , has had numerous traffic violations in the past year , or other non-health related risk factors . The above mostly relate to medically underwritten policies . There are simplified issue policies -LRB- that do not require an exam -RRB- and guaranteed issued policies -LRB- that do not have any requirements -RRB- that can be obtained when a medically underwritten policy will not work . Simplified and guaranteed issue policies do have restrictions on face amounts , you must be in a certain age range to get them , and they are not available in every state . Thus , some people do apply for simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies and get declined simply because they do not fit the age , or it is not offered in their state . This is most common for persons applying by mail or online . If you enlist the help of a good agent , you can avoid many declines by having proper guidance in the first place .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
That is a great question ! If you are looking at whole life insurance policies , you want to look at whether the policy is an `` immediate issue '' policy , or one that is a `` graded -LRB- or `` modified '' -RRB- '' policy . An immediate issue policy is one that goes into effect as soon as the underwriting is approved , the policy is issued , and the first payment received -LRB- in some States the policy may be honored if the company issued the policy , and the payment had not yet been received -RRB- . These policies are most often written for people with great health , or people with minor health issues , as determined by that company 's underwriters . -LRB- A good independent agent can help you find the best fit . -RRB- A graded or modified policy will be issued to folks that have more significant health issues , or by companies that are mass marketing the policy - like AARP or Mutual of Omaha 's `` guaranteed everyone qualifies '' policies that you see on TV or that arrive in your mailbox . These policies will all have a period of time where the desired face value -LRB- and typically it is very small - often not more than $ 10,000 -RRB- is not paid out unless the insured dies an accidental death -LRB- as strictly defined by the insurer -RRB- . Typically any health related passing will result in a payment only of the amount you 've paid into the policy , and some amount of interest . This period is generally 2-3 years . -LRB- Again , an independent agent can help sort through companies to help you find the best grade for you . -RRB- So an `` everyone is guaranteed '' policy like AARP offers will somewhere in the small print tell you that the policy has a graded or modified benefit period of ___ years and during that period a death resulting from natural causes will result in the return of premiums paid plus __ % interest . This is done to help limit their cost over the entirety of the risk classes they will be insuring . The other companies that offer this type of policy are doing it based upon your specific health issues , and the increased risk to your mortality . For example , someone who has no diabetes , or that has controlled their disease with a regimen like Metformin will usually be a certain immediate issue candidate . Someone whose diabetes went unchecked for a while , and is on an insulin program will more often than not be issued a graded/modified policy . If that unchecked diabetes has led to complications like amputations , diabetic coma , or neuropathy , you can usually expect the more expensive guaranteed issue policy to be your only option . Again , a good agent can help you find the best fit for you . You can expect to pay less for the immediate issue policy , more for the graded policy , and most for the guaranteed issue policy . I hope that answers all of your questions , and if not , please do n't hesitate to reach out and contact me , I 'd be more than happy to spend some time answering whatever questions or concerns that you may have . Thank you for asking !
Even if someone has car insurance , if you choose to sue them you have to file in small claims court unless this is a much larger claim . I would reach out to an attorney to get more details . When someone has insurance , usually that company will give you a settlement however sometimes what they offer is not what you can get or should be awarded which you end up in court anyway . There are some great attorneys that specialize in accidents . I do not know what state you are in so I can not make a recommendation but just do some homework . Get someone that is reputable . Good Luck .
Someone can take a life insurance policy out on you if : 1 -RRB- you have an insurable interest in their life , and 2 -RRB- you consent to having the policy placed . An insurable interest means that they would be harmed financially if you passed away because you provide for them in some way . People ca n't just pick out someone to insure and try to make a profit off of their death . Consenting to the policy means signing the application , agreeing to have your medical records reviewed if required , doing an exam or phone interview if ordered . Often when someone is taking out a policy on another , they will choose a No Exam policy . But that is totally up to the person being insured and the person taking out the policy , who is usually the policy owner .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
In my personal experience , all the companies I have worked with want to provide a service for their clients and do it honestly . They try hard to be fair and sometimes I have seen them bend in favor of the client . I think what people hear are the few times someone has been `` wronged '' by the company . From my own personal experience in such a case , I can say that companies can not air their side of the story . With one company I used to work with , the company offered a fair offer to settle in a small kitchen fire . The client refused and wanted the entire house rebuilt . The client went public about how the company would was not making a good offer . Over a year later , the community realized how unreasonable the client was being and his support dwindled quickly . The company had no recourse . The agents had no recourse . They could not talk about the details due to privacy issues . Meanwhile , the client is making every effort he can to publically trash the company . There are some situations where the company has to go by what the contract states and there may be some situation where it may not feel `` right '' to the client , but the company has to honor the contract . With all that said , I would recommend working with a broker to help you find an insurance company and also help fight for you in those situations where you feel like you have been wronged . Having a broker who is familiar with the people in the company will help your case more than you can imagine .
If someone has a terminal illness at the time of applying for life insurance , there are a handful of guaranteed issue policies that will provide that person with coverage . However , this type of policy usually has a minimum age limit of 40 + , is for small face amounts -LRB- usually under $ 25,000 -RRB- and not all states offer them . In addition , this type of policy is graded and will not pay out the full face amount for death due to illness until 2 + years have passed . If someone has life insurance and then is diagnosed with a terminal illness , and if the life insurance application/interview was done truthfully , then the policy will pay for death due to that illness , even if it occurs shortly after the policy was taken out . Some policies even offer a rider that allows the terminally ill person to take part of the death benefit in cash prior to death .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
There are many opinions on the best type of life insurance and without trying to sound smart the best is the one in force when needed . I work with many people each year on life insurance and everyone has a different scenerio and you need to find someone you trust to consult with . There honestly in my opinion is not a one size fits all . There are many great products out there that can fit your needs and your budget . Ask questions , research and again find someone you trust .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Homeowners Insurance Paid Monthly Or Yearly ?
That all depends on if you have your homeowners insurance escrowed or not . If you have your homeowners insurance paid by your mortgage lender then your homeowners insurance premium will typically be paid annually . If you pay your homeowners insurance your self you can typically elect to pay it monthly or annually . Some carriers may even allow quarterly or semi-annually . Every company is different , please contact your local agent to find out how your carrier handles these types of transaction .
An Index Annuity is a type of Fixed Deferred Annuity . It guarantees a minimum return , while allowing index-linked gains up to a specified yearly cap or `` limit '' . The index-linked gains are usually based on a yearly basis . The most common crediting method is the `` Annual Point to Point '' method ; this method credits the yearly gain -LRB- during the contract year -RRB- up to the specified cap . There are other Crediting Methods that calculate index movements on a monthly or even bi-annual basis . But it is important to remember that all index-linked gains are limited to the yearly or monthly cap ; this is the trade off for receiving a guaranteed minimum return .
That 's a great question ! Your insurance company will offer you a few different options . The most common are to pay monthly , quarterly -LRB- every three months -RRB- , every six months , or yearly . Not every company will offer all of those options , and by far the most common billing method is paying monthly . Your insurance company may also make payment options dependent upon your length of time insured with them , the make and model of your car , and your driving history . I 'd expect to pay monthly with most companies , and be happily surprised if they give you the option to pay less frequently . Thanks for asking !
An escrow account is usually setup for you when you buy a new home , and this account is used to pay your property taxes and your homeowners insurance . Your monthly payment will include our principal and interest payment to the mortgage lender , as well as 1/12 of your yearly property taxes and homeowners insurance . When payment is due , your lender will make the payment on your behalf from the escrow account .
Having a lapse in coverage means that you 're responsible for 100 % of expenses if you have an illness or injury occur during this period because the plan would not be in force , thus not providing any coverage . The idea of insurance is to protect yourself in the event of a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you do not have health insurance in force , then you 're taking on all of the risk yourself instead of passing it off to the insurance company by paying a monthly premium . Please note , under the Affordable Care Act , if you 're without active coverage for more than 90 days , you may be subject to a penalty . In 2014 , the penalty is calculated in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan .2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . These figures will increase in 2015 and 2016 - penalties will be adjusted for inflation in future years .
Having a lapse in coverage means that you 're responsible for 100 % of expenses if you have an illness or injury occur during this period because the plan would not be in force , thus not providing any coverage . The most common way people have a lapse in their coverage is because they did n't pay their premiums . The idea of insurance is to protect yourself in the event of a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you do not have health insurance in force , then you 're taking on all of the risk yourself instead of passing it off to the insurance company by paying a monthly premium . Please note , under the Affordable Care Act , if you 're without active coverage for more than 90 days , you may be subject to a penalty . In 2014 , the penalty is calculated in one of two ways :1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan .2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . These figures will increase in 2015 and 2016 - penalties will be adjusted for inflation in future years . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare covers a preventive screening visit when you 're new to Medicare and yearly `` wellness '' visits . A full annual physical exam would not be covered at 100 % . The new to Medicare preventive visit can be completed one time within the first year your Part B is active and includes a review of your medical history , discussion about preventive services -LRB- e.g. certain screenings , shots , etc. -RRB- , ht/wt measurement , blood pressure check , vision test , and a BMI index check . The yearly `` wellness '' visits can be completed once every 12 months if you 've had Part B for longer than a year . The purpose of the wellness visits is to develop and monitor a plan to help prevent disease and disability based on your health . Your would complete a health risk assessment with your doctor as well . Like the welcome to Medicare preventive visit , these visits include a review of your medical history , ht/wt check , and a blood pressure check . These test are only covered at 100 % if you 're doctor accepts Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . Otherwise , you would be responsible for a portion of the costs -LRB- typically 20 % coinsurance -RRB- and the Part B deductible may apply -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . You can also be subject to paying for other services that are conducted during the visit if they are not covered as part of the preventive visit benefits -LRB- e.g. blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- . Typically , original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only covers about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . You may want to look at supplementing your coverage with a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare supplement plan -RRB- to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of more assistance . Thanks very much .
You 're not going to go to jail for not having health insurance . If you do n't have health coverage that meets the minimum essential coverage requirements , you would be subject to paying a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage .
Everyone will have to have health insurance that meets the standards set under the affordable care act or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No . You can continue to not have health insurance , however , if you elect this option , you will have to pay a penalty -LRB- a `` shared responsibility payment '' is how they titled it I believe -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid paying the penalty , you would need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Under the Affordable Care Act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years .
You can pay a penalty if you prefer not to have a health insurance policy . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years .
No . Under the affordable care act , if you do not want to have health insurance , you can elect to pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Under the affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Beginning in 2014 , under the new affordable care act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years .
Under the Affordable Care Act , everyone will have to have health insurance or pay a penalty -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of 2 ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . Its important to note that the penalty will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . To avoid the penalty , you need to have health insurance that qualifies as minimum essential coverage . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
No one has to buy health insurance , but it 's very advantageous to have it . The idea of health insurance is to protect yourself in case of a catastrophic financial event . In the case of health insurance , this can be when you have a visit to the hospital and/or you have to have surgery . While health insurance can be expensive , if you ended up in the hospital one time , you can be subject to thousands of dollars worth of medical bills . Under the affordable care act , if you do not want to purchase health insurance , you can elect topay a penalty instead -LRB- also known as an `` individual shared responsibility payment '' -RRB- . If you choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage , you will still be responsible for 100 % of your medical care . The penalty is calculated in one of two ways -LRB- you pay whichever is the higher amount -RRB- . In 2014 , the penalties will be calculated as : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty calculations will change each year . In 2015 , method one increases to 2 % of your yearly household income and method two increases to $ 325 per person . In 2016 , it will increase again to 2.5 % for method one and $ 695 per person for method two . The penalty methods will be adjusted for inflation in later years . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Does Basic Homeowners Insurance Cover ?
A standard homeowners policy should include the following coverages : A. Dwelling B . Other Structures C. Personal Property D. Loss of Use E. Personal Liability F. Medical Payments Some carriers and states use different wording for these coverages from time to time and virtually every insurance carrier adds their own bells and whistles -LRB- some of which are very valuable and must have coverages -RRB- to make up their specific policies . Contact your local independent agent to discuss your home specifically and what coverages you need for your situation .
The basic definition of Homeowners Insurance is a hazard insurance or fire insurance policy provided for the primary residence of the titled owner of a property . Banks and mortgage companies simply name all policies ` Hazard Insurance ' as the building -LRB- dwelling -RRB- is the hazard ; many others simply refer to all policies as ` Fire Insurance ' as one of the basic perils covered is ` Fire ' . The correct terminology of the house insurance for the home you own and primarily reside in is called Homeowners Insurance . The Department of Insurance in all States refer to the Policy Form as a Homeowners Form , the basic policy form details are provided by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
There are 3 policy forms for property insurance . Basic , Broad and Special . Basic will cover , Fire , Lightning , Windstorm or Hail , Explosion , Smoke , Vandalism , Aircraft or Vehicle Collision , Riot or Civil Commotion , Sinkhole Collapse , Volcanic Activity . Broad will cover all of Basic plus falling objects , weight of ice , sleet or snow , and accidental water damage . Special will cover everything that is not specifically excluded . If the policy does not exclude the coverage you are covered . Common exclusion are government action , nuclear hazard , war and military action , flood , fungus and pollution . Special Form gives you the broadest coverage 's . Now with special form you have a choice of an HO3 or an HO5 An HO3 is named perils for personal property and HO5 is open perils minus exclusion for personal property . While HO3 is the most common policy purchased the HO5 is the broadest coverage you can get in a homeowners policy .
Homeowners Insurance is most often written on Form HO-3 ; the Form HO-3 Homeowners Special Form does include damage from the perils Vandalism and Malicious Mischief . The coverage will apply to the Dwelling and Detached Structures covered by the policy ; however , the deductible will apply . On the other hand , if only Basic Fire Coverage is purchased , sometimes known as ` Fire & Lightning ' , there would be no coverage afforded for damage caused by vandalism . This would apply to forms HO-1 or DP-1 which are the most basic forms of coverage available for single family residences . It is important that you review your specific insurance policy to assure that you are certain of what is covered ; also , you may contact a company representative for a detailed review of your policy !
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
-- > Normal 0 Before college students consider purchasing renters insurance , which I would refer to as tenant-homeowners insurance , I suggest they make the effort to find out if they are already afforded coverage by their familys homeowners or tenant-homeowners insurance . Students who maintain their primary residence as their familys home should be considered insureds under their parents policy . As an insured , their personal property should be covered anywhere in the world and in particular , at a temporary residence . In many cases , the coverage afforded by the familys policy will better than coverage they could buy on their own . Thats the first place I would check and I would get the response confirmed in writing . There may be limitations and deductibles to consider but in most cases the basic coverage should be adequate to cover most situations . Personal liability coverage should be available as well . For students who are no longer residents of their parents household -LRB- emancipated -RRB- or for parents who fear the impact of claims on their coverage , a separate policy could be considered . Insurers may be more reluctant to cover students on their own while at school but coverage should be available . A good place to start may be the parents insurer or agent . Basic policies with a $ 10,000-15 ,000 personal property limit should cost $ 200-300 a year . Coverage will be limited to specifically named perils , deductibles will apply and property will be covered for its actual cash value -LRB- not the cost to replace an old item with a new one -RRB- . If replacement cost coverage is available , I suggest you consider adding it .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
All homeowners insurance polices cover fire . There are 3 types of coverage 's , basic , broad and special and all three will cover fire . Fire is the main reason why homeowners polices exist . In fact in the old days homeowners insurance polices were called fire policies since fire was pretty much all that was covered . Since then polices have become much more comprehensive .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
No , root canals are covered under Dental Insurance Policies , and usually as a basic service . You would need to purchase a dental plan to cover that procedure . Most traditional dental plans cover it as a basic service , with an 80/20 coinsurance after the deductible . That 's where you pay the deductible first , then the plan pays 80 % of the bill , and you pay 20 % . But , before you just buy a dental plan , and go get the procedure , check to make sure what the waiting period for basic services is ... Many dental plans have a 6-12 month waiting period for those types of procedures .
It varies by UL policy and company , but here are a few basics . There are basically 2 parts to all ULs , but there may be more . The one I have has 3 parts . Part A is how much you pay into for just the life insurance coverage and part B is what goes into the accumulation account to make the policy grow money wise . A UL has flexible premiums meaning you can pay in as little or as much as you want within a specified amount within the contract guidelines . There is also the target amount which is what you probably should be paying in minimally . If you pay the minimum , it basically is a term policy that continues . If you decide you want the account to grow , you can put more money into to make the cash accumulation grow . I usually tell the clients I work with to think of it as a permanent life policy with a high yield bank savings account since most will offer you at worst a 3 % return for ever dollar you put into the accumulation section of the account . Do keep in mind that rates maybe be more or less depending on the policy and current interest rates that the insurance company uses . There are many other factors in these types of life policies , but that is the basics of it .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
It depends on many factors , but here are the main factors for price . 1 -RRB- What 's the policy type ? 2 -RRB- What 's the face amount ? 3 -RRB- What 's your gender ? 4 -RRB- What 's your age ? 5 -RRB- What 's your general health like ? 6 -RRB- Are you a tobacco user ? What you should look at are basically two main questions . What does the life insurance cover and how much do I need ? Cost is a factor for a policy , but it 's much more important to get the right policy with the riders you 'll need .
If you 're insured with a reputable company and a good agent , your renters policy should include theft . All a renters policy is is a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It 's there to cover your stuff and your liability . It 's rare , but there are companies that offer coverage that may not include theft . This coverage form is called `` Basic Form '' and it will not cover theft . Never , never , never accept a policy written on a basic form for your renters coverage . The most common form is Broad Form , and it will cover theft . Most companies and agents will use this when writing your renters policy . Do n't accept anything less .
The basic answer is no , unless you have scheduled it . What this means is that homeowners insurance will cover some lost/stolen/broken items when you are away from your house . Typically cell phones and electronic devices are excluded ; however , cell phones and electronic devices can be scheduled on your policy . This means that they are specifically named as an item in your policy that will be covered in the case of a covered peril . I , however , do not recommend doing this because the deductible for your homeowners policy is usually much higher than a stand alone policy you can get for a phone .
It depends upon the source of the water damage , the type of policy you have and whether the house is abandoned . To make this answer easier , lets assume that you have a Homeowners 3 policy and the house is either occupied or vacant -LRB- some furniture and presence -RRB- . Water damage from a burst pipe : typically your homeowners insurance will water damage from a burst pipe , however it will not cover the damaged pipe . You can get an endorsement to cover the damaged pipes . Water damage from rain/hail/wind : this will only be covered on a basic homeowners policy if the rain/hail caused the hole in the roof that lead to the water damage in your bathroom . Once again , you can get an endorsement to cover rain/hail/wind damage . Water damage from sewer backup or sump-pump failure : if the bathroom is in the basement and the water damage if from sewer backup or sump-pump failure you can only get coverage for this IF you have the appropriate endorsement - sewer and water backup . Please note that this is typically a sub-limit in your policy and goes towards both cleanup and replacement . I hope this helps .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
Yes , Basic Life Insurance does cover accidental death , as well as death due to natural causes -LRB- i.e. illness , old age -RRB- . You sometimes have the option to put an Accidental Death rider on a basic life insurance policy . This increases the amount that would be paid to your beneficiary if you died accidentally , as opposed to dying from natural causes . Usually accidental death riders are offered in options of multiples of your basic death benefit . E.g. Your policy would pay $ 100,000 if you died of illness . But with the Accidental Death rider it would pay 2 times that amount , or $ 200,000 , if your death was due to an accident of some sort . However , without that rider , the policy would still pay $ 100,000 for death due to accident OR natural causes .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How To Figure Out How Much To Save For Retirement ?
There are a number of sites that provide calculators to help you determine how much you need to save each year to accumulate a specific sum of money for retirement . Will you need 70 % of your preretirement income ? More than 70 % . ? The first step is to define what a successful retirement means to you and then set a date . Then you can determine what it wil cost cost to finance your retirement , starting with a budget . Working with a financial or retirement planner would be best , however , a site calculator gives you a the idea . . On my website www.jpw.ca you will find a Retirement Planning Checklist avaialble as a resource . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a great question ! The first step is to decide exactly what your retirement looks like to you . Do you want to travel ? Hole up somewhere and fish all day ? Live basically as you do now ? Once you 've done that , take a look at where you are financially right now . What are your assets ? What debts do you have ? How much longer do you anticipate working ? Then you can figure out how to get from where you are , to where you need to be to ensure your retirement looks like you want it to . The rule of thumb is to live at the standard that you are now , you will need to save between 8-10 times your current salary . If you are n't comfortable now , then you will need to save even more . A good advisor can help you find a way to get started , or to adjust the plans that you have . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Just to flesh out the above answer a bit more : your deductible can range from 0 $ to $ 1000 , typically . The higher your deductible is the lower your monthly premium payments will be . While lowering your monthly payments by increasing your deductible is a popular cost saving method , it is not always the best idea . What you really should do is sit down with your finances -LRB- or financial planner if you have one -RRB- and figure out how much discretionary income you have each month . The reason you should do this is you have to figure out how much of adeductibleyou are comfortable paying in the even of an accident . Even though it is nice to save $ 20 a month , if you have a serious accident and ca n't afford your $ 750 deductible it does not make any difference . I hope this helps .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
Only you can answer that question . Figure your fixed costs after retirement , your plans -LRB- do you plan to travel ? -RRB- , and other individual factors . Also deduct out social security if you want to figure out how much additional savings you need to meet your goal . My opinion is at least 80 % of current income on average but that is not written in stone , every case is different . Sit down with a good agent familiar with retirement planning . He or she can help you put together a good plan for a comfortable retirement .
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
If you are asking how do youcalculate how much do you need to save for retirement there is a process to follow . First you need to determine what retirement success looks like to you . Your retirement planner may be trained to help you if not a lifestyle planner could . The next step to figure out what that lifestyle wouldcostand make a retirementbudget . Now you can do somemeaningfulcalculations . Total up what income you expect from any government plans , pensionplans , etc. . Compare this amount to your retirement lifestyle budget . The difference is what needs to be funded byadditionalsavings . There are calculators on the websites of financialinstitutionsto give you an idea . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Setting up a personal retirement plan first starts with your frame of mind . Are you committed to following a plan , as close as possible , to get to your end goal ? If you answer yes , then you are ready to move forward . First , grab all your different accounts which you have monies in . This will include your checking & saving , and money market accounts and retirement accounts including IRA 's & your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- if you have it through your employment . If you do n't have these type of accounts , it is ok . You just need to know where you are to start . The idea is to figure out how much you can start to realistically set aside every month or year . Then start to do this and stick with it . Once you get this habit established , you will need to know how much you need to retire . This number can be humbling however do not let it get you down . You have to have a goal to get to . At this point , I would recommend sitting down with a professional who can help you make some wise choices as there are several vehicles available but are not all created the same . Working with someone can and will help you to stay accountable to yourself striving to reach your end goal . Reach out to me if you have any additional questions .
To figure out how much life insurance you need with kids , you can make a little worksheet . Put down how much your family spends on average each year , and subtract your spouse 's salary from that . The difference is what you need to cover . Multiple it by how many years until your children are adults . Throw in extra for college . That is how much life insurance you may want to purchase .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The first step in buying life insurance is to determine how much coverage you need , what type of insurance will work best for your needs , and how much it will cost . With life insurance you can not just pick out the policy with the features that you like . You must qualify medically , and your overall mortality risk -LRB- or lack thereof -RRB- determines your rate . What company you use and the type of policy you choose also figure into the premium you will pay . So the best way to buy life insurance is to talk to an agent who can help you determine how much you need , explain what types of policies work best for that need , and then shop around to find the best rate for which you qualify . Good life insurance agencies stick with you and guide you through to the time when the policy you want is in your safe , ready to go into action if tragedy strikes . While a life insurance agent is the last person most people wish to consult , in the end , most policies require an agent as the middle person , anyway . Starting out by calling an honest agent can make the process very simple and help you save hundreds of dollars .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
end question
start question
health-insurance
Why Have Health Insurance Premiums Increased ?
That is a great question . The simple answer ? Because the costs of health care are rising , as are the costs of insuring an increasingly aging population . We have nearly 10,000 people a day turning 65 , and oftenas they age , they have more health issues . Our population is also increasingly overweight , and suffering from the effects of that . There are a lot more reasons , but those are the best few . Want to discuss more ? feel free to contact me . Thank you for asking !
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
As Frank indicated , homeowner insurance premiums should not necessarily increase each year . To make sure your coverage stays current , you should look at the replacement cost necessary to rebuild the home on a regular basis . This number may well increase for a number of reasons , which can increase your insurance premium . At the same time , you can often offset potential premium increases by making your property profile more attractive to insurance companies , such as security and other system upgrades . If your premiums are increasing , then your agent or broker should explain why . Otherwise , this could be a sign that you need to consider other insurance partners who will take a more active role in making sure you have the best policy and premium for your situation .
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
-- > Normal 0 Whether anyone wants to admit it or not , insurance consumers tend to seek ways to reduce their insurance expenses while insurance providers are always looking for ways to increase their revenue . A rate increase is one alternative insurers might use to increase your premium but more often than not your premium frequently increases for other reasons . An insurer 's base rates are only one factor that goes into the calculation of your actual insurance premium . You should know what those factors are . The most common factor may be an increase in your amount of insurance . Your insurance company may claim construction costs in your area have increased and your amounts of insurance have been increased accordingly . That may be true but higher limits do n't always mean higher premiums . Discounts they may have applied in prior years may have changed or been discontinued . Penalties may have been applied if you had a claim or your credit score has changed . Rate categories may change as your home gets older . The reasons can be endless . But that doesnt mean you have to simply accept the increase . Question the reason for any increase . Determine if you are eligible for other discounts or credits . Consider other insurers who might offer you more favorable premium treatment . In my experience , insurers rates dont change all that often , and they can go up or down . Other factors used to calculate your final premium are usually the reason you see your premiums go up so often . Be proactive , a little effort and a few questions could save you a lot of money .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about your Home Insurance policy and what specifically may cause the premium to increase in your case . In general , there are a number of factors that can contribute to a premium increase . For example , it is likely that your policy has an `` inflation guard '' provision that increases the dwelling amount provided each year . If the dwelling amount on your home increased over last year , that would certainly account for a premium increase . If you suffered a covered loss and had to file a claim , that might affect your renewal premium . If your area was hit with heavy weather related losses , like the ice daming that the North East and specificlally CT was plagued by , even if yo were not affected , your company might have had to take a rate adjustment as a result of the losses . Your Insurance professional wil be able to review your coverage and advise you not only as to why the policy may have increased , but also ways to save .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
There are several different reasons home insurance rates increase . Most carriers would probably tell you that at least a portion of their increases are linked to weather/natural disaster related claims increases over the past few years . I often hear from clients in Wisconsin -LRB- our location -RRB- thinking they should not have to pay more for insurance due to the carrier having more lossesfrom fires out west , or hurricanes on the coast.Clients say they did not have a claim so why should they pay more?This debate will rage on but I doubt much will change . Insurance carriers are a business and when they pay out more in claims , due to bad weather or what have you , they have to make up for the difference ; increasing premiums . They spread risk around to remain competetive , trying to balance out higher risk states/locationswith lower risk states/locations . Average premiums on a state to state level often reflect this -LRB- for example , Florida is often ranked number one for premium cost primarily due to the high risk of weather related claims -RRB- . Another common reason carriers provide for increasing prmeiumsis to keep pace with inflation , many policies offer inflation guard to keep pace with estimated values . What is the take away here ? Home insurance is WORTH IT ! Protect your home and investment , likely your most expensive one ! Talk to an independent agent today !
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
There are many reasons why a home insurance policy would increase . Homes are insured for replacement of dwelling or in other words , what does it cost to build . If cost of construction and materials increases then replacement cost will increase which means your dwelling amount , or the amount to insure increases , which of course causes an increase in premium . Other factors could be regional rate adjustment do to losses . Also age of your home could be a factor . Claims you may have made could be a factor . Did you un-package your auto policy from your home could be a factor . There are many factors which should be discussed with your agent to determine premium changes and what if anything can be done to adjust the rate .
In simple terms , a COBRA health insurance is a short-term continuation of the exact same group health plan you had with your employer prior to termination from that job . So , if you liked the coverage provided by the plan prior to termination , you will still like the coverage provided by the plan under COBRA administration because it is the same plan . What you may not like is the cost under COBRA administration . Many people incorrectly assume that COBRA rates are excessively higher than the rates you paid while employed . This is incorrect . By law , your insurance rates under COBRA can not exceed 102 % of the rate you were paying before termination . So , why does the COBRA premium seem so much higher than the premium prior to termination ? The answer is your employer 's contribution to your health insurance . While you were employed , your employer was definitely paying a portion of yours , the employee 's , health insurance premium . If you worked for a `` benefits rich '' employer , they may have been paying all your premium and even contributing some to your dependents ' coverage . Under COBRA , the employer no longer is responsible to contribute anything to your health insurance premium . You are therefore responsible for 100 % of your portion of the premium as well as that of your dependents . That is why the COBRA cost is more than you were seeing while employed . So , the real question then becomes is it cheaper for me to continue with my current group health plan under COBRA , or is there a better alternative in the personal health insurance marketplace . The only way to answer that question is to solicit quotes from personal health insurers .
The percentage of the population that will die at a given age increases with age . That is , there will be a higher percentage of 50 years die in a given year than 20 year olds . That is why term life insurance is more expensive for a 50 year old than it is for a 20 year old . Imagine what the cost would be fore term life insurance for a 90 year old . The choice then , is to purchase a policy that will pay a death benefit should you die in the next term -LRB- 10 20 years for example . -RRB- The problem is that you are likely , very likely to live longer than the term . If you still want the death benefit paid to those you love , you must take steps to get a longer term policy , in which case you will probably still outlive the policy term , or buy a whole life policy . The whole life policy will have an initial premium that is greater than the term insurance premium , because it is going to pay the death benefit sometime and it guarantees not to increase the premium , ever . The whole life policy can do this because it accumulates reserves in anticipation of the increasing frequency of death claims as you age . These accumulated reserves become the cash value of the policy . Because the premium for term insurance increases as you become older there will be as point at which the whole life insurance purchased at an earlier age will be cheaper than the term policy purchased at an increased age . The cash value gives the policyholder the flexibility to make adjustments over time . It provides a cash reserve or emergency fund and a loan can be taken against the policy . If the coverage is no longer necessary it can be surrendered and the cash value will be given to the owner of the policy .
There are several reasons why a homeowners insurance policy can increase in price and coverage . Here are some of the most common . Most policies come with an `` inflation guard '' that will raise the dwelling amount by a predetermined percentage every year . This can cause an increase in premium . The insurance company may have filed for a rate increase with the state . You may have received a `` new home buyer '' credit that is decreasing as the policy ages . You may have received a `` new home discount '' that may be getting reduced as the home ages . You may have lowered your deductible or made changes to the policy . You may have lost a discount for a central station alarm . The company may have done an inspection on the property that determined it needs to increase the cost to rebuild the home . There 's many reason but these are some of the top ones I 've come across . Hope this answer helps .
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
There are many reasons why your premium may be increasing . If you have recently put in a claim , that may be a factor for increases . Depending on where you live , and depending on the volume of claims that occur in your state , you may see resulting increases in premium to help counter the amount of losses that have taken place . Another reason may be that your insurance provider is raising your dwelling limits to properly cover you in the event of a loss . Insurance carriers will raise coverage often to ensure that if there is a loss , that you will have adequate coverage to replace your home . They have to do this because as time goes by , the cost of building supplies increases , as does the cost to actually build . If you would like to look into lowering your premium , I would recommend contacting your local insurance professional , or reach out to your respective insurance carrier and tell them you would like to look at some options to lower your rates . Thanks for asking !
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Yes , unless they are guaranteed to stay `` level '' , life insurance premiums can increase . One of the biggest factors on how much life insurance costs , is the length of time for which you lock in your premiums . E.g. . If you buy a 10 year level term policy , the premium will be relatively low , but will only stay the same for 10 years . After that , the premium will increase drastically . However , if you buy a permanent policy with guaranteed level premiums , the initial premium will be higher , but you will never experience a rate increase . When you are approved for a life insurance policy , you will see right at the front of the printed policy how long your premium is guaranteed to stay level , and at what point the premiums could/will increase . If you are nearing a point in your policy where your premiums will go up , you might want to take care of that now , as you may have options now that will not be available after the premium increase takes effect .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is Passive Restraint Discount On Auto Insurance ?
This is a discount on your auto insurance that refers to your seat belt and air bags in your vehicle . There are many other discounts that carriers provide for your auto insurance rates . Some carriers provide discounts for alarm systems , ant-lock brakes , automatic traction control , and radar sensing systems -LRB- very new technology -RRB- just to name a few .
The discount applies to the Personal Injury Protection or Medical Payments coverage available on your auto policy . Some states require such coverage and others do not . Talk to your Insurance Professional about your particular policy to see if you have the coverage or not . If available , the discount is applied because your car is outfitted with drivers side or full compartment air bags or automatic seat belts . There may be other discounts available if your car is equipped with other safety features like anti lock breaks and the like . Again talk to your insurance professional about this to be sure you are receiving all available discounts .
A car alarm will reduce your auto insurance rates . Depending on the type of alarm -LRB- passive , active , etc. . . -RRB- the discount is likely to be approximately 5 % -25 % , depending on the carrier . Also , the discount may not apply to the entire premium . Get ALL of the discounts you are entitled to by working with an experienced car insurance broker . No charges or fees !
I am going to say for your best interest you need to contact an insurance agent that you know and trust . You say Medigap policy and that term could refer to one of the high deductible plans-L , M. N - if you were to reside in South Carolina . There are some important decisions you need to make . If you need to go to Medicare Advantage due to budgetary restraints then you need to understand if you fail to enroll in original Medicare on your `` initial enrollment period ' you will have to pass underwriting issues to ever return to original medicare . While the Medicare Advantage plans are Part C and includes your coverages for Part A , B , & D in Part C , they all are not designed to pay all of your costs and you need to understand what the copays and deductibles are so you can make an informed decision ,
That is a great question ! There are several reasons why annuities can be a good investment , and some reasons why they may not be . The downside ? the purpose of an annuity is to save up for a later payout , so there are steep penalties for taking out the money early . Once you 've put your money in , you have to leave it there for a period of time , so you need to be able to leave that cash alone . You 'll need to have an adequate savings , and cash flow to cover whatever may occur before the withdrawal time comes . Depending upon the annuity , there might mot be the return that you might get from an alternative investment . The pluses ? There are great guarantees . You will know exactly what you have at risk , and what your potential gains will be . It 's unusual to lose money with the right annuity , and most will guarantee no less than what you started it with , so even if the markets and interest rates tank , you get back no worse than what you put in . Ca n't say that about bonds , money markets , or stocks . Annuities can also be structured to give lifelong payouts , and include the lifespans of both you and your spouse . Having an income that you ca n't out live is also a big plus . They are passive investments , which means you do n't have to keep track of what they are doing , you buy and let them roll , or look at them once a year and adjust , if you decide to . The security of knowing you will be receiving a lifelong monthly payment is a huge part of financial peace of mind . Thanks for asking !
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Is disability insurance worth having ? The answer depends on the individual . What we 're talking about with disability insurance is paycheck protection . Disability insurance does n't pay for a medical claim , at least not directly . Disability insurance simply creates a pot of money to use as you would with your paycheck . It is up to the individual to decide the worth of protecting their paycheck . Maybe if there 's passive income or massive savings the need for disability insurance may not be that great . But , if you 're not in that position financially , you should think long and hard about disability insurance .
when is disability insurance worth it ? When you have something to lose . Insurance of any type is simply protection from loss . If you have passive income at a level high enough to maintain the lifestyle you want , then no , probably disability insurance is not for you . However , if your lifestyle depends on your income , and you have nothing without your income , would n't insuring your paycheck be a good idea ?
How important is disability insurance ? It 's going to depend on your situation . Since Disabiliyt Insurance is paycheck protection , the first thing you have to ask `` is my paycheck worth protecting with disability insurance ? '' Maybe you have passive income or considerable savings that may reduce the the need for disability coverage ? Maybe you are just shy of retirement ? I guess the importence of Disability Insurance to the individual is going to be in proportion to how long that person can go without a paycheck ? Answering that question usually establishes your waiting period for most people for the policy they are considering .
Who should buy disability insurance ? Honest answer ? Anybody who needs to protect their income from any time loss from illness or injury . If a person has passive income that can support their lifestyle , the need for working income protection is n't that great . Most people however still work to provide for themselves and family .
Unfortunately , most people cancel their disability insurance when they can no longer afford it but still need it . The only time a person should cancel disability insurance is when they no longer need it . Meaning , they do not have to work for an income to survive . So , when you are debt free and independently wealthy , retired or have a stream of passive income whether you work or not , that is the perfect time to cancel disability insurance , not before hand as the risk will still exist .
How important is disability insurance ? How important is the ability to pay your bills if you get sick or hurt and ca n't work ? A person who has passive income to such a degree that work is optional really does n't need disability . While another person , especially one with little to no savings or reserves NEEDS something like a disability policy to cover that risk .
In order to plan your finances , you have to have an income . If you become disabled and can no longer work , you no longer have an income -LRB- minus any passive income -RRB- . Disability Insurance ensures that you will continue to receive an income while you are unable to work.Many people think , well I have a savings account to back me if something like that should happen . But the average long-term disability claim is 31.2 months -- would your savings last that long ?
Anyone that depends solely on their paycheck to get by needs to insure it against a disabling eventthat might require extended rehabilitation . An insurance company will not underwrite someone that has a large amount of passive or unearned income . They will also not insure someone that does not medically qualify . Finally , an insurance will not replace 100 % of one 's lost income because a -RRB- the insured would then have no incentive to return to meaningful employment , and 2 -RRB- the maximum monthly income replacement is around 2/3 of lost income and it is income tax free -LRB- if the insured pays out of pocket -RRB- . Permanent total disabilitycan bea living death . Not having the ability to bring in any income at all is one of the worst things that can happen to a person , especially to us ego-driven males . Total disability was -LRB- prior to 2009 -RRB- the single most likely reason for losing one 's home . In short , the consequences of a disability can be worse than death . There are various statistics that show how often disabling events occurs , but who cares about statistics ? If it happens to you , statistics do n't pay the bills . One should buy DI early in their working life . That 's when it is inexpensive and the premium can be guaranteed not to go up -LRB- unless additional coverage is purchased later -RRB- . Group DI is not portable . Own your own coverage . If you do n't have it yet . get it .
When do you need disability insurance ? Quick answer ? before you file a claim . The need for disability insurance is going to depend on the value a person places on protecting their paycheck . If they have passive income and money saved or investments they can liquidate , the need for disability insurance may not be that great . For most people though , savings and investments are for a later purpose in life like retirement . Liquidating your retirement assets before retirement simply leaves you with nothing far too quickly . So it is up to the individual to decide the need . The other thing , do n't wait till a disability you recover from shows you the need . Disability insurance , at least good disability insurance , is extremely hard to get . Lots of declines or class ratings for second time around applicants . A second time around applicant is somebody who had something happen before , did n't have coverage and realized how important it really is to have . So they apply in hopes somebody will underwrite them . The problem is , many wo n't .
There are several federal tax benefits to owning life insurance . The most obvious is that the death benefit passes to the policy beneficiary income tax free . This doesnt just apply to individuals but can apply to a business , a trust , or an estate as well . When the insurance is owned by a third party or an irrevocable trust it will may also bypass estate taxes . When an owner needs to withdraw money from a policy by surrendering the policy the money that is withdrawn receives favorable tax treatment and only that portion that is in excess to the premiums paid becomes taxable . You can take out federal income tax-free loans from a permanent life insurance policy . The loans may reduce the death benefit and are limited by the cash value of the policy . When loans are taken the proceeds are not subject to the 3.8 % passive income tax rule of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- These loans will not affect income taxes on your social security benefits and they do not affect the FAFSA application for student funding . Increasingly policies have provisions that allow the owner to withdraw funds to pay for certain long term care expenses . This is usually free of federal income tax . Discuss this more closely with your insurance agent as different company designs will result in varying taxation . There are tax free transfers available to holders of permanent insurance policies that allow growth in excess of premiums paid to be transferred to other insurance and annuity contracts without incurring a current tax obligation . Of course , death eliminates all taxes on deferred growth .
Utilization management guidelines/requirements in health insurance/managed care companiesare designed to maximize the effective use of health care resources in a cost effective manner . Such guidelines/requirements can apply to the provider of health care services and/or to the insured person . Depending upon the insurance carrier and the health insurance program you are enrolled in these guidelines/requirements may be either active or passive . This means in some cases they are more like strong suggestions with little or no negative consequences for non-compliance and in other cases the guidelines/requirements must be complied with for the services to be covered at the in-network level of benefits or to not be declined for payment . Utilization management is a far reaching term that can touch virtually every aspect of health care from physician care to prescription utilization . The objective is to establish a set of recommended best practices and steps in treatment to be followed when dealing with a person 's health problems . For example , you might be required to try a long established prescription medication that is now a lower cost generic to treat a condition and have to show that the desired results were not being obtained before you might be approved for a newer , name brand medication that treats the same condition but is much more expensive . Having certain procedures performed on an outpatient basis rather than requiring a hospitalization is another example . The bottom line is that utilization management protocols attempt to get the appropriate level of care in the most appropriate and cost effective setting to maximize the value of our health care dollars . Sometimes utilization management can be a complicating factor in a patient 's and/or doctor 's experience as it may require everyone to go through steps A , B , C & D rather than jumping right from step A in treatment to step D. But , with insurance costs continuing their relentless rise , the consumer should anticipate that utilization management will be much more prominent in their health care than ever before .
Most auto insurance companies/vehicle insurance companiesoffer a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount : typically , a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is when you have 2 or more vehicles -LRB- cars , trucks , SUVs , motorcycles ... -RRB- on the same type ofpolicy . Insurance companies usually do n't allow the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount for different types of motorized vehicles on different policies . For example - if you have a car on one policy and a motorcycle on a different policy -LRB- but both policies are with the same insurance company -RRB- then usually you would not get a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount . You would get the multi-car discountif you have 2 cars insured on the same auto insurance policy . Also , most companies that insure motorcycles will give a multi-unit discount if you insure 2 or more motorcycles on the same motorcycle insurance policy . The key point with the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is that you are usually required to have 2 or more vehicles covered on the same policy . It is always best to review with your professional independent insurance broker to find the coverage options , as well as ways to secureall availablediscounts -LRB- so you wo n't end up paying more than you have to for your insurance -RRB- .
The best answer to this is maybe . You can receive discounts for many things when applying for auto insurance . One of the available discounts is being married . However , if you are married , and only have one car then you are effectively nullifying the discount . The reason for this is the corollary discount to being married is the multi-car discount . If you are sharing a car with your spouse , then you will be rated for two drivers with one auto , which means more exposure and subsequently higher premiums . So the best way to maximize your insurance discounts is be married , each drive your own car , and throw on a type of homeowners policy , even if you are just renting . I hope this helps .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Where Can I Purchase Renters Insurance ?
You should be able to purchase renters insurance from any carrier that provides homeowners insurance . Most of your major carriers will provide policies for auto , home , and business along with other lines possibly . Contact a local agent to find out the products that they have to offer . A local agent can help point out the coverage that they believe you need based on the information that you provide to them .
For all your insurance needs , a trusted agent is your best source . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . The agent will help you select appropriate limits of coverage . It is terrible when a person has a claim and then discovers that the limits of her policy are insufficient to take care of the need .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
There are many ways to purchase renters insurance online . Most major insurance companies will allow you to purchase directly thorugh their websites . There are also websites that give you access to many different companies at once . However , there are some things that concern me about purchasing insurance online . As a former agent for a top 3 insurance company , I would become the `` agent '' for individuals who had purchased their own insurance online . I consistently found problems and lack of coverage when I recevied these clients . My recommendation is to reach out to a local independent agent and tell them you are looking for renters insurance . This will give you the opportunity to build a relationship with that person and have them make recommendations for certain coverages . There are many additional coverages that are available on renters policies from water back-up , to identity theft coverage , and specific coverage for jewelry , collectibles , music equipment , etc. . It is best to discuss these options with a professional so you know exatly what is covered and how it is covered . While you can quickly purchase renters insurance online , you may leave yourself with gaps in coverage , which can become costly in the event of a claim . The process is not that much slower within an agency -LRB- we frequently put polices in place the same day -RRB- and you can be confident that you have the proper coverages . If you do not feel comfortable with the agent you are in contact with , ask friends and family who they work with and find someone you truly trust . Even though you are purchasing a fairly inexpensive renters policy , take your time to find the right solution for you . In the unfortunate event of a claim , you will be happy that you did .
Renters Insurance covers the Personal Property of the Insured Tenant , offers Loss of Use for a covered hazard and provides Personal Liability for the Insured Tenant and resident family . The Renters Insurance Policy is commonly known as a Form HO4 and is available in all States . Renters Insurance is mandatory in a few States where the Government has been faced with an unusually high number of law suits thus inundating the legal system ; in other States , you will find some Landlords require tenants to purchase the insurance to provide a layer of protection for the possible negligent acts of a tenant causing property damage to the building , property of other tenants or inadvertent bodily injury to others . The possession of Renters Insurance is a display of genuine responsibility for one 's personal property and protection for others . Renters Insurance Online is available online in multiple States at the following link : WEBSITELINK In order to produce a lower premium , it is recommended only to purchase the minimum amount of Personal Contents coverage to sufficiently replace the personal property of the insured and to select a high deductible . This combination will generate a comparatively lower premium ; renters insurance is written for an annual term and is fairly inexpensive .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Rates for renters insurance depend upon a few factors . Where your apartment is located , how much personal property you are insuring and what liability rates you requested . For example , in Michigan , where I live I can get renters insurance covering $ 30,000 of personal property with $ 300,000 in liability coverage for about $ 200/year . The point is renters insurance is very affordable . I hope this helps .
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
Where we may find it difficult to define ` Best ' Renters Insurance ; we believe the best renters insurance would be the most comprehensive coverage for a competitive premium rate . We believe in most States , this coverage lies in the hands of Renters Insurance Online available through Stillwater Insurance Group . We have an Online Link for consumers to obtain a quote , choose options and purchase the insurance policy online . If the definition of ` Best ' is ` Cheapest ' ; the easiest method to generate a Cheap Renters Insurance quote is to select a low amount of coverage with a high deductible . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States at : WEBSITELINK
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is available for tenants in all States . Renters Insurance Policies cover personal property , additional living expenses , personal liability and medical payments to others . Renters Insurance can be purchased by tenants renting houses , apartment units , condos and townhomes . Renters Insurance is transferrable from one rental unit to another when the insured moves ; however , it is not transferrable across State lines since policies need to be rewritten according to State Department of Insurance regulations which are different in each State . Stillwater Insurance Group offers the most affordable options for renters ; there is also an online self service renters insurance platform available directly for clients ' use : WEBSITELINK Using the above link , you may obtain a free quote and purchase your insurance contract directly online . For further questions regarding any details , you may contact a licensed representative at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance is usually associated with the owner of the dwelling ; whereas Renters Insurance is specifically intended for the non-owner occupant of the dwelling . Renters Insurance is intended to provide Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Coverage for the tenant of a home . In a tenant occupied situation , the owner of the dwelling will usually carry Landlords Protection Coverage for the dwelling which does not offer any protection to the tenant . The tenant should purchase his/her own Renters Insurance . This is coverage is very inexpensive and is well worth it ; there have been many instances where a property owner has brought legal action against a tenant for negligence leading to a fire or other type of claim ; the Renters Insurance provides Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant which may provide defense in such an occurrence . For a renters quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you should find a licensed representative in your State for a quote .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Should A 30 Year Old Save For Retirement ?
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
A columnist for Fool.com , Morgan Housel , just wrote a terrific article on this topic titled , An Open Letter to Everyone Under Age 30 . He describes why the best estimate for what stocks will return over many decades is 6.6 % per year , and then goes on to put some real numbers to what 6.6 % growth means : Every dollar saved by a 20 year old for the 45 years until retirement will grow to be worth $ 18.50 . Since a 30 year old only has 35 years until retirement , each dollar saved will only be worth about $ 9.60 . As Housel says , `` Saving a little bit of money when you are young can be a more efficient way to build wealth than saving a lot when you 're older . ''
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
Life insurance rates for smokers may be less expensive than you realize ! Of course , as experienced brokers , our job is to shop , compare and find the lowest prices with the help of our top-rated websites and modern software . Nicotine use is one of the underwriting factors considered when determining rates . However , other factors , such as use of medications , existing conditions and height/weight will also factor in the determination of prices . A few general estimates from top-rated companies : -LRB- Rates are monthly for a healthy smoker...10-year guarantee -RRB- : $ 39 - $ 250,000 40 year old male $ 19 - $ 100,000 40 year old male $ 33 - $ 250,000 40 year old female $ 60 - $ 500,000 40 year old female $ 29 - $ 250,000 30 year old male ALSO ... $ 109.86 - $ 500,000 40 year old male 20-year guarantee
By life insurance money , I assume that you mean the money the insurance company pays to your beneficiary ? It comes from your and everyone else 's premiums . Think about it . If one thousand young healthy 30-year olds buy a 30-year level term life insurance policy , all of them pay premiums for 30-years . But how many of them do you think will actually die during that 30-years ? One or two of them . Those are the only ones that will get anything back from the insurance company . The premiums from all 1,000 times 30-years will pay the death benefit for the one or two that die .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
How much you need to save for retirement by the time you are 40 depends of course on your desired retirement lifestyle and the amount needed to fund it . Without those details , I unable to offer you an opinion . There are online calculators available of course . However , here is a retirement worksheet to help you understand the process . I have used 6 % for illustration purposes only , it could be higher or lower and is only to give you a point of reference . Age 65 was used as the retirement age -LRB- 25 years in the future -RRB- , Again . this is for information purposes only . 1 . Annual retirement income which must be provided by savings $ _____ 2 . Amount you must save to generate income $ _____ -LRB- line 1 . X 11.55 -RRB- 3 . Amount you have already saved $ _____ 4 . Amount these savings will have grown $ _____ by the time you retire -LRB- line 3 X 4.2919 -RRB- 5 . Amount of savings still needed $ _____ -LRB- line 4 minus line 2 -RRB- 6 . Amount you need to save each year $ _____ -LRB- line 5 X .01720 -RRB- If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
The reason that life insurance premiums go up with age is because mortality rates go up the longer someone lives . When someone buys a 10 year term life insurance policy at age 20 , the rates will not be much higher than at age 30 , because the death rate for 30-40 year old persons does not vary much . However , the rates for a 10 year term policy will be much higher for a 60 year old person than a 50 year old person , because mortality rates go up a lot between ages 60-70 , especially for men .
Thirty years certainly could be enough to save for retirement . The total amount you need to save in today 's dollars depends largely on what retirement success means to you . Once you have a basic idea , you can determine what is needed to fund your desired lifestyle . Deciding what you want to do 30 years from now is quite difficult so using the `` standard '' 70 % of current income is a good starting point . Once you are within 10-15 years , you should start fine tuning your retirement plan to get things aligned . NOTE : The rule of compound interest 72 interest rate = the number of years it takes for the funds to double . For example 72 10 % = 7.2 . That means at 10 % interest your money doubles every 7.2 years . Therefore , the earlier you start the better . More information on what you ought to know about protecting and growing your Nest Egg can be found at WEBSITELINK If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
When you buy life insurance to cover a mortgage , you can buy your policy in the face amount and term length that you want . Often , that is 30 year term to cover a 30 year mortgage . About 20 years down the road you may have half your mortgage paid off . At that time you could reduce your life insurance policy to half the face amount and save some money . Or you could start out taking half of your coverage in 30 year Term and half in 20 year Term . Buying the shorter term policy will save you some money and when it runs out , you still have 10 years of coverage left . All this is to say , you really ca n't know how much mortgage life insurance costs until you talk to an agent and figure out the best way to set up your policy . Give someone who sells level Term life insurance today ; you will be glad you took the time .
Whole Life Insurance has many great aspects but using it as a retirement investment is not one of them . There are some companies that are promoting a concept of using your whole life insurance as your personal bank , instead of getting a loan from a bank to buy something use the cash value of your life insurance and then pay yourself back . But when it comes to retirement a whole life policy will not give you the gains needed to fund your retirement . When you look at your retirement saving , whether its your 401K that we are talking about or youre personal saving . Your financial planner should be telling you that you can only talk out about 5 % of the value per year otherwise you may run out of money . Think about that , if you have $ 100,000 in a 401k that will give you a yearly income of only $ 5,000 . If you are looking for options to protect yourself against premature loss and has additional income options for retirement then you should really look at index universal life . A 45yr old male non-smoker could invest $ 150 per month into a $ 100,000 life insurance policy and when he retires at 65 , he should be receiving about $ 6,000 of yearly income , most of which is tax free . This is a great option for most individuals , if you need more help or have additional questions please feel free to contact me .
There is no such thing as best life insurance to buy . It all depends on your need and your stage in life . If you are in your 20s and 30s then a whole life policy may be appropriate since it tends to be more affordable in this state of your life . In your 40s and 50s a 30 year term may make much sense when a retirement investment is also created to parallel to term life so that if the policy expires in your 70s or 80s , your retirement savings will take care of burial cost in the invent of death . Remember always contact your financial advisor before you act . One thing to remember about whole life is that your premium goes to two places : Insurance and investment . Lets say you are paying $ 160 per month for whole life policy . $ 100 may go towards your insurance and $ 60 may into an investment account that yields some interest . Let say you purchased a face amount $ 500,000 and you were aged 30 when you bought it . Forty years latter at age 70 your saving has generated about $ 400,000 . If you die , your beneficiary will receive the insurance face amount of $ 500,000 but not the $ 400,000 in saving/investment account , That amount remains with the insurance company . You can withdraw your $ 400,000 as a loan while you are alive and has to paid back to the insurance company . If it is not paid then your insurance face amount will be reduced by loan balance upon your death . In short your beneficiary will receive $ 100,000 upon your death . Term life insures you only for a fix number of years usually 10,20 or 30 and policy expires or renews at a much higher rate You may also become un insurable at policy expiration . Remember to talk to your financial adviser
end question
start question
annuities
Who Has The Best Annuities ?
There are three basic crediting methods used by non-qualified tax deferred annuities . The first is fixed interest rate crediting methods of 5 , 7 and 10 year guaranteed rates . Sentinel has a leading 5 year fixed interest rate . The second is the use of indice crediting methods , both domestic and foreign . Genworth has an innovative earnings rollover product . The third is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . Prudential is one of the leading manufacturers of variable annuities .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
You can purchase an Annuity from a few different sources . However the best way is to use an independent insurance agent who specializes in annuities . An independent agent can shop the market and all the different companies/products to give you the best annuity for your situation . You can also get annuities from captive insurance agents who work only for one company . They are limited -LRB- or highly encouraged -RRB- to just sell annuities from that one company . And since annuity rates are constantly changing and no one company has the best rates for all types of products , some consumers see this as a disadvantage . Some banks provide annuities , however their selection is often limited . Financial Advisors sometimes sell annuities as well as some stock brokers ; however , they usual stick to mainly variable annuities that are directly invested in the stock market . You can find an independent annuity expert online via a web search for them in your area . Or at various websites such as WEBSITELINK
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Who the best Annuity Company is depends on a few different things . Mostly the current annuity market and who currently has the most competitive rates . It also depends on your personal situation and needs and which company offers a product that fits those needs best . In other words , there is no best annuity company , it just depends . But it is important to use a company that has good financial ratings , and `` A '' or better is usually considered a good rating . So whichever well rated company offers the most competitive product that fits your needs , is the best company .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Suze has modified her disdain over annuities , more specifically variable annuities with income riders , but overall has been punitive on annuities . Most entertainers are taking their cues from show sponsors who have a disposition against annuities , sometimes from misinformation , or just plain ignorance . Annuities are not for everyone . But for those clients , who qualify under its product suitability goals and provisional features , annuities can be an integrated part of a retirement plan .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
What are deferred annuities best suited for ? The challenge with this question is that the term deferred annuity has at least two `` definitions '' . I will describe two scenarios and if your question is not answered , please do not hesitate to contact me . A deferred annuity can refer to exchanging a lump sum for a guaranteed income at a point in the future . In this situation , a deferred annuity would be suited for someone who wanted a guaranteed flow of income with no management responsibilities . A life annuity may or may not include a guaranteed payout . There are different options , so ask your insurance agent for details . In addition to the income amount , taxation during the the deferral period and of the income flow should be considered . In Canada , a deferred annuity can also refer to Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- and Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- . Both of these are issued by insurance companies and offer the option of an annuity in the future . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they also offer guarantees not offered by other institutions for non-registered investments . These include potential creditor protection and estate planning opportunities , such as bypassing probate . Segregated funds are similar to mutual funds , but they offer maturity and death guarantees . In addition , some segregated funds include the `` locking in '' of gains . Depending on your individual situation , there could also be some tax advantages to these plans . These type of deferred annuities are best suited for individuals who are looking for , and would benefit from , the additional features and guarantees . This is an overview of a potentially complex subject . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me .
It is best to find an independent agent who specializes in annuities . They can help you sort through the hundreds of annuity products out there , and show you a comparison of products well suited for your situation . It is important to use an independent agent who will show you multiple companies . If you go to a specific insurance company , all they will show you are annuities from their company . An independent agent can show you annuities from all of the companies out there . As a consumer , be sure to try your best to have a set of defined goals you can go over with the agent . This will help them find suitable products to show you . You can also do your own homework on the internet . There are many different sites out there that will show annuity comparisons . But as I eluded to before , it is easy to get bogged down in all the info for hundreds of annuities . Some sites try to help by showing what they consider `` consumer friendly '' annuities , such as WEBSITELINK
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
Anyone can use an annuity . If you 're asking who is most likely to benefit most from an annuity that answer would be anyone who needs a stable , predictable , and reliable income stream . Another type of person who benefits from owning an annuity is anyone who believes they will live a long time as annuities can provide income that lasts for ones lifetime even if the income stream is more than the initial money in the annuity .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Buy Life Insurance For A Child ?
That is a good question ! There are a number of excellent reasons to buy life insurance for a child ! Life insurance is like buying money at a huge discount ... If you buy the right kind of life insurance from a mutual company . That is whole life insurance . The younger the insured is the less the premium will be assuming the person is in good health . So even if you buy a smaller policy it will have a longer time to accumulate cash value . And that cash value grows tax-FREE ! And may be accessed tax-Free as well when the ` child ' is older . Or if you retain ownership of the policy YOU can access the cash value to pay tuition for their schooling or whatever you decide . The policy could also be used to contribute to the `` child 's '' retirement income when that happens ! I could go on and on , but you should talk with a knowledgeable insurance adviser .
Wow . What a wonderful and popular question with a great answer ! Children 's rates are the very lowest there are . By locking in a guaranteed rate on whole life for the child 's entire life , you will never have to worry about medical issues or insurability issues . The parents and later the child themselves , will have the lowest premium guaranteed . Insurance will accumulate value with whole life , so they can borrow against it for college or even fund retirement . Think of all the sick and uninsurable children out there who wish their parents had purchased life insurance for them before they got sick .
Always be sure to be well protected as parents before thinking about buying life insurance for your kids . That having been said , once a child is covered by a life insurance policy , that child 's `` insurability '' is protected so long as that policy is maintained . That means that as her or she goes through life , should they develop a serious medical condition that might otherwise make them potentially uninsurable , like Crohn 's for example , the coverage they have can not be taken away from them . Further , if a permanent plan is purchased for your child , that policy will develop cash value over the years that can further help their future financially .
Buying Life Insurance is really for two reasons , one if for the unfortunate , the childs death . The other is as a gift of life as I like to call it , something you can give them in the future . Especially if you design the policy such as Whole Life to build cash value over time . This can be used in the future for the child 's future family , to help pay for college and more .
Make sure that there is enough life insurance on the mother and father . If that is the case determine the reason for the life insurance . It could be that the policy is for final expenses . Sometimes life insurance is sold to juveniles as a way to protect their future insurability . The best way to buy the policy is to go to a trusted insurance agent . If you dont already have one , get recommendations from friends , colleagues and neighbors . The agent should listen to your needs , give sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
Why should you buy coverage for a new baby ? Well three basic reasons may apply as to `` why '' ? First , if you were to lose your child , what would you do ? Would you go into work on Monday ? Would you and your spouse agree on the cost of the service and headstone ? Sorry to be blunt . A life insurance policy lets you take a breath , decide on your service and reduces the `` what can we afford to do ? '' in the situation . Second , you can purchase guaranteed insurability for your child 's future when you build your policy . These options take away the insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child 's future purchases , no matter their health . Finally , depending on your choice of policy , you get your child a foothold in their financial future . You are knocking out one of the foundation pieces to a financial future while the price is super cheap . One of many things down , more choices for other dollars later .
Why buy whole life for a child ? Well I guess I can tell you why I bought whole life for my kids . In no particular order or rank , I bought whole life because that is the cheapest if will ever be , those policies will become cornerstones of their financial lives . Much like buying a piece of property they now have something to build on . They have future guaranteed insurability with these policies as well What that means is they ca n't be told `` no '' by the insurance company , even if they are no longer insurable . Sort of like a stock option . And finally for this post if either of my kids were to die before me I would be devastated . I would be crushed as I have great kids . So insurance on them would help me get through their passing by paying bills that still need to be paid . I am planning for their future living with these policies and accepting the aspect of the possibility of their early passing and the help they would provide . I could never imagine having an argument with a spouse over what headstone to buy . Whole life on a child is an investment in their future , not just their death .
Child Riders : I always offer a child rider to parents . Recently -LRB- today -RRB- I added $ 20,000 child rider a mother 's policy . It cost her a whopping $ 8.60 . Not each , but for all 4 children . So the cost per child is $ 2.15 . And if she has more children or adopts they are covered from the 15th day of life with no qualifying . No extra cost . The automatic coverage has meant the difference of being able to cover a child born with a grave illness or not . Which brings up another benefit of most child riders . Guaranteed convertibility of up 5 or 6 times the amount . In the case above when a child reaches age 25 they have the guaranteed right to convert the $ 20,000.00 rider to $ 100,000.00 Permanent plan . No medical questions , no exams , no blood work . At standard rates . That is a huge benefit . We have converted young cancer patients , a Marine in Iraq and a 25 year old that had been in a coma for years to name a few . All for $ 8.60 or $ 2.15 per child . And they can still buy individual policies on the kids . Or use the saved money to buy much more coverage on mom and dad . Individual child policies : I am also a big proponent of short paying a childs policy . Actually just about anyone under 60 that can afford the extra premium . I do not really show cash values on small policies as they take a very long time to grow and normally do not amount to much . Twenty years ago we were selling $ 5,000 Burial and Child plans . While better than nothing , the now grown children are underwhelmed with the face amount or small cash values . Today I am suggesting much larger plans . Not child plans but plans that will be worth more when they are adults and need to protect their own children . $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 or even $ 250,000 plans are not unusual and very reasonable from top rated Insurance Companies . Starting at about $ 20 . As always an experienced Life Insurance Agent is your best source of information . One that has more than one or two companies or types of insurance .
The more accurate question is why do parents want to take out life insurance on their infant child ? You may want to cover final expenses in the death of the child . You may want to start a long term savings program for your child . You may want to purchase the maximum the carrier allows for the future of your childs insurability , especially if your familys health history includes chronic illnesses . But keep in mind , most life insurance carriers will not issue a policy on a child if the parents have no coverage of their own .
A child rider on Term life insurance adds life insurance to your policy that will cover your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . It is usually available to children age 15 days to approx age 17 -LRB- the age varies by company -RRB- . You select a face amount of the child rider , usually between $ 5,000 and $ 25,000 . This that would pay if a tragedy occurred in your family , and you lost one or more of your children . The child rider benefit would pay that entire amount for each deceased child . The rider pays for death by any reason , just as your policy does , with the exception of suicide in first two years , or if your child had a serious health condition that was not disclosed on the application and death occurred during the first two years of purchasing the rider . If your child has type 1 diabetes , intellectual disability , or other maladies , unfortunately , they will not be able to be on the rider.Therefore , it is good to get the rider while your first child is young ; then the rest are automatically added . While few children pass away , the real value of a child rider can come when your child turns approx 25 -LRB- again , the age varies by company -RRB- . At that time the child rider can usually be changed to a permanent life insurance policy of about 5 times the face amount of the child rider . They do not ask any health questions , so if your child developed an illness after being put on the rider , it will not matter . They will then have a reasonably priced life insurance policy for the rest of their lives .
Why buy for a child ? Because you can lock in the lowest possible rate this way , for the rest of that child 's adult life ! It will never go up . Never change . Always be there , and available for their college funding , medical emergencies , home down payment , and their retirement . Regardless of their future health or insurability , they will always have that life insurance you locked in when they were a child . Good enough reason ? Thank you . GARY LANE .
There is three reasons to insure a child with permanent life insurance . First , the reason no one likes to think about , but a child 's death is devastating on all levels , but is a possibility . Not having the money to bury a child just adds extra hardship during an extremely difficult time . Second reason is to protect the child 's insurability . Once the child has a life insurance policy , they can in most cases increase face amounts without proof of underwriting . This is crucial to a child diagnosed with type I diabetes , cancer or even worse . The third and final reason to insure a child with life insurance is the cash value . Not only can you use the policy as a teaching moment for the child to learn to save but the many uses as the child grows into an adult . Cash value from a life insurance policy can be used for emergencies , hardships , as well as college , a down payment on a first house or even retirement . Child life insurance is so affordable and important , every parent should strongly consider it for their children .
That is a great question ! There are three good reasons why you want to buy a policy for your child . The first is for the obvious - if your child were to pass away , you would not have to bear the expense of the funeral by yourself . The second is so that you can save your child thousands of dollars over their lifetime . When you purchase the policy when they are young , the price they pay for the policy is locked in , and that is what they pay for the rest of their life . Many policies for young kids will offer a rider to increase the coverage amount without any medical questions . This is important in that if the child were to develop health issues that might otherwise cause a company to deny or drive up the price of coverage , they can still add to their coverage . The third is that by purchasing the policy when they are young , the cash value that builds in the policy can be sizable if and when they might need it . If you would like more detail , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
That is a good question ! There are a number of excellent reasons to buy life insurance for a child ! Life insurance is like buying money at a huge discount ... If you buy the right kind of life insurance from a mutual company . That is whole life insurance . The younger the insured is the less the premium will be assuming the person is in good health . So even if you buy a smaller policy it will have a longer time to accumulate cash value . And that cash value grows tax-FREE ! And may be accessed tax-Free as well when the ` child ' is older . Or if you retain ownership of the policy YOU can access the cash value to pay tuition for their schooling or whatever you decide . The policy could also be used to contribute to the `` child 's '' retirement income when that happens ! I could go on and on , but you should talk with a knowledgeable insurance adviser .
Why is life insurance important for a child ? It creates the cornerstone of a financial plan for their lifetime while they 're still wetting their pants . What a parent can do for a child is create a policy that grows over time and can give a child future options for additional insurance that can not be denied by the insurance company . One of the most powerful gifts you can do for your children is take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' down the road to your child when they wish to increase coverage .
You should buy life insurance for a child within the first 30 days of birth . Insuring a child is very affordable and does a few things . First , in case of loss of life , it would pay final expenses which range from $ 8,000 to $ 12,000 . Next it will protect the child 's insurability . If a child ends up with juvenile diabetes or cancer and they have purchased a convertible policy , they now have life insurance at a very affordable rate the rest of their life . Lastly , purchasing cash value life insurance can help the child in later life with funds for college , down payment for a house or even retirement .
I am not sure I would say that a child needs life insurance . There are two main reasons to insure a child , one is financial savings and the other is protecting insurability . Writing a whole life or universal life policy , or cash value plan , on a child has advantages to be able to save extra money for college , a first home or even retirement . The premiums are very affordable and with the right plan can have a good guaranteed rate of return on investment . The second reason is protect the child 's insurability . If you purchase life insurance on a child most all companies have a conversion clause which means the child can convert to higher face amounts , five , ten or greater times the original death benefit without proof of insurability . If the child had a diagnosis in later life and became uninsurable then they would have this policy at a very reasonable rate for the rest of their life .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Affects Homeowners Insurance Premiums ?
There are many factors . The reconstruction value of your home and other structures on the property . The amount of personal property that you have . Your claim history . Your credit level . Do you insure your home and auto with the same company . The age of you home . The geographic location . And more . This is just to name the ones that pop up immeadiately .
There are many factors that affect the policy premium pricing . Therefore , more questions than answers ... initially ... First of all , what State are we talking about , since rates vary greatly from State to State , not to mention significant regional variations within a State ? For one example , think of a coastal location exposure to wind vs. a dwelling located inland and not generally exposed to the same potential perils . Which one is going to present the highest chance of risk for wind damage losses ? This will definitely affect the premium . Additionally , one insurance company 's rates can vary greatly from those of another . Also , a few of the many other questions : What is the amount of intended insurance needed on the dwelling ? How old is the home ? What type of construction ? What type of fire protection and proximity to the dwelling ? What other types of protection devices and method of monitoring ? Any dangerous animal breeds ? Swimming pool ? You really need to talk to an agent about rates in your location . Ask for quotes from the strongest carriers . Ask particularly about their financial strengths and claims paying histories . Try to get carriers with A.M Best ratings of A or better , if at all possible . Additionally , many State Insurance Departments have consumer information for the public , relating to homeowner polices . Do some of your own ` on-line ' research , if possible . You can also ask other homeowners in your area about their carriers ' pricing and experiences with claims .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
A DUI will not directly affect the rate on your homeowners insurance . It can affect your rate by proxy though . DUI are typically very costly . If your credit score should take a big hit due to the financial consequences of the DUI your rate could conceivably change . To say that your homeowners rate absolutely would not be affected by the consequences of a DUI would possibly not be true .
There are many factors that affect the rates for homeowners insurance : Homeowner -LRB- insured -RRB- - The insured 's age , credit rating , loss experience , prior coveragewill affect the premium charged for a homeowners policy . Home location - Location is a very big deal . For example , a home located on the coast will be subject to a much higher premium compared to the same home located far inland due to the increased possibility of loss from wind or storm damage . Likewise , a home located in an area that has excellent fire protection -LRB- very close proximity to a fire station -RRB- will have a lower premium than the same home located in a secluded location very far away from fire protection . Home Construction - A stick-built wood frame home is more expensive to insure than the same valued home constructed of fire-resistive materials due to the increased potential for catastrophic fire loss with the former . Coverage Limits - Obviously a $ 500,000 home will cost more to insure than a similarly located/constructed $ 200,000 home .
Your homeowners insurance will more than likely go up if you have a pool on your property . Every carrier and policy are different . The factors that will affect your rate are the type of pool . Is it above ground or in ground ? How large is the pool ? Is there a locked gate and fence around the pool ? These are just a few of the factors that will possibly affect your premium . Contact your local agent to find out what effect a pool would have on your homeowners coverage .
Sometimes applying for Life Insurance can slightly affect your Credit Score . Occasionally some companies will use Credit Score as a determining factor in your Premiums . And they will run your Credit Score to find out what it is . According to Experian `` Inquiries '' account for only 10 % of your Credit Score . And `` Excessive '' inquiries count against you . So unless you have had multiple recent inquiries , a single inquiry from an Insurance Company should not affect it too much according to Experian . However , I am a life insurance specialist , not a credit specialist . Experian , TransUnion , & Equifax all have some good info on their sites about what makes up your score and what can affect it .
If your question is what affects the stability of life insurance rates , the answer is , not very much . Life insurance rates are based on multiple millions of lives and death rates are predictable . A dramatic change in the financial markets could affect life insurance rates if the companies can not earn the necessary returns to maintain their promises . A dramatic epidemic could affect rates . Recently rates were affected by regulation . These changes are generally small .
It depends on a few different things . First , the type of vehicle will affect the policy premium . For example , a 2005 Toyota Corolla would typically have a lower premium than a 2005 Cadillac Escalade due to the cost difference in the vehicle and the cost difference in the repairs of the vehicle.Second , the driving record of the insured will affect the policy premium . For example , someone with one speeding ticket and an at fault accident will have a higher policy premium than someone with no speeding tickets or accidents . Thisis due to the fact that the insurance companieswill see that person witha ticket and accident as a greater risk to insure than the other person with a clean driving record . Third , the garaged location -LRB- home -RRB- of the vehicle will affect the policy premium . If you are garaging your vehicle in an area with a high rate of auto theft or vandalism the policy premium will be higher than in an area with a low rate of auto theft or vandalism . Again , this goes back to a greater risk for the insurance company . There are many more rating factors that the insurance companies use and they differ from state to state . Here in Arizona , for example , they will look at your credit score , occupation , and highest level of education in order to provide you with a price on coverage .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
A claim against your homeowners policy could affect subsequent premiums . You might be getting a discount for having been loss-free which would not be available next term . If the loss met certain prescribed levels it would make your home a substandard risk and the premium might be increased to reflect the increased risk . Actions taken on rates normally affect a policy for three years .
Divorce does affect life insurance but maybe not in the way you are asking your question . It does not affect your premiums or cost but it will affect other aspects of your policy . The first thing that needs to be addressed is the beneficiary . You may not want your ex to receive your life insurance proceeds . Next aspect to be examined is your face amount . Now that you are on your own , do you have the proper amount of life insurance for children , loved ones to cover debt , etc. ? Last is the term or type of policy . Are the premiums guaranteed for the proper amount of time ? I recommend sooner rather than later sitting down with your agent to address these needs before it becomes too late .
It really depends heavily on the homeowner carrier chosen and the type of pool , whether in-ground or above-ground . In Florida , the premium will also be affected by the presence of a screened-in pool . While the screened-in situation helps with the accidental fall peril factors on the liability side , the screen has a negative effect in terms of its vulnerability to wind damage on the property side . Security devices in and around the pool and access doors can have an affect on the pricing . Bottom line is that carriers view and rate pools differently . You really need to get some rate comparisons .
A homeowners policy pays for damages cause by named perils . The perils most likely to affect a foundation would be earth movement or flood . The most common homeowners policy excludes coverage for those perils . You can get policies to cover each of those circumstances . If , however , the foundation was damaged as the result of a named peril , such as fire , the damages would be covered under the Homeowners policy .
Talk to your iInsurance Professional about your specific needs , but in general , there are a few basic factors that will affect both coverage and pricing on a Homeowners ' policy . After an accurate address and location , probably the most obvious , is the dwelling coverage amount . This can be determined accurately by completing a Reconstruction Analysis . Once the dwelling amount is established , other factrrs are included namely proximity to a hydrant and fire services , age of the dwelling , additional security elements like alarm systems etc. . Pricing is also affected if you insure your cars with the same company because some nice discounts may apply .
In most cases , just having a pool does n't necessarily affect the pricing of a Homeowners ' policy , but it does affect underwriting requirements and should get you thinking about the best way to cover for that additional exposure . Here in Connecticut , building codes for each town regulate the security measures that are required for pools . In ground for example require fencing and self latching gates . Insurance rules will undoubtedly match that so if these are not in place , coverage wo n't be offered . As for the increased liability exposure , having a pool is one of many good reasons to talk to your Insurance Professional about Person Umbrella Liability policy for added protection .
Claims on homeowners policies are very infrequent . They signal to the underwriter that there might be something that makes your property other than standard . Consulting tables they use the amount of the claim to determine if additional premium will be required in the following year . This is not to compensate for the claim but merely express the fact that your property isnt a standard property . There are several other important factors but because a claim can affect your homeowners premium I suggest that you consult with your agent prior to filing a claim , unless you are being threatened with a lawsuit .
Homeowners Insurance Rates differ from each zip code in the United States ; each carrier has a different rate for each risk . The major factors are geographic location , amount of coverage , deductible option , prior claims history and various other factors which may affect the premium . The premium is simply the price at which the carrier would accept the risk presented . To directly answer the question , there is no ` Typical Homeowners Insurance ' ; many consumers are now avoiding speaking to an insurance agent or representative , there is an online link available to obtain a home insurance quote , select options and purchase home insurance directly online in multiple States : WEBSITELINK If there are any questions and/or advice needed that are not fully satisfied with the online format , we would strongly urge you to contact a licensed representative to be fully informed prior to making your final decision regarding home insurance .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Why Is Long Term Care Insurance So Expensive In California ?
Long Term Care Insurance rates are based on a variety of factors including your age , where you live and your health . In many areas of the country -LRB- California for example -RRB- , the cost of facilities and other benefits is higher than many -LRB- not all -RRB- other parts of the US . That , of course will impact the rate . An experienced FULL-TIME broker is a great resource for additional information . You can compare plans and apply for affordable coverage .
Why is long term care so expensive in California ? Well , probably the main reason is the cost of care in California is also on the higher end . Insurance premium costs use the cost of care , -LRB- or repair or services , with other insurances -RRB- to generate a premium . I would imagine if you looked you might find the cost of care in the state of California is up there .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Why is long term care so expensive in California ? Well , probably the main reason is the cost of care in California is also on the higher end . Insurance premium costs use the cost of care , -LRB- or repair or services , with other insurances -RRB- to generate a premium . I would imagine if you looked you might find the cost of care in the state of California is up there .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The minimum insurance requirement in California is called the financial responsibility requirement . All drivers in California are required to carry evidence that the car that they are operating is insured to these set standards . The standards are $ 15,000 per person of bodily injury liability coverage , and $ 30,000 of bodily injury liability coverage for death to more than one person . There must be % 5,000 of property damage liability insurance in place . Insurance isnt mandatory . There can be a cash deposit with the DMV of $ 35,000 , or a certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California , or a surety bond for $ 35,000 issued by a company authorized to do business in California . Insurance is the choice of most vehicle owners . The companies that insure cars in California are required to report the status of the policies of insurance electronically to the DMV . If you decide to no longer operate the automobile and it is not parked on a California highway or street , you must notify the DMV that you are suspending coverage , and why . The minimum coverage law allows you to purchase the most expensive auto insurance policy available . While it may be adequate in many circumstances , in those circumstances where the damages sustained exceed the limits of the policy the vehicle owner will discover that all of their assets are in jeopardy and there will not be anything to help the owner , except bankruptcy .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
I am going to answer your question by qualfying what I think you are asking . Under original medicare as long as the doctor is contracted to accept medicare then you can basically go to any doctor . What if you live in Detroit and you prefer to go to a doctor in California ? Medicare is going to want to know why when you live in Detroit and you are seeing a doctor in California . Under the Medicare Advantage Plans you need to understand the terms HMO , PPO , PFFS , in order to assure you are getting the care in `` network '' .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Actually California has some of the most competitive auto rates in the country due to Prop 103 . While everything else in California is expensive my clients are often pleasantly surprised that the auto insurance rates in California are not sky high . In California we have a different set of rules governed by the Prop 103 law that heavily regulates the rates in California and what an insurance carrier can charge . Insurance rates are not credit based but are heavily rated on your driving record and driving history .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Do Medigap Plans Cover Prescription Drugs ?
No , by law , Medigap Plans are not allowed to offer Prescription drug coverage within the plan . You would want to get Part D to cover prescription drugs . It actually works out better -LRB- for most people -RRB- that the plans are different . The reason is our medication needs can change from year to year so by having a Part D it allows the individual to change the prescription plan without changing their Medigap Plan .
Medigap does not include prescription drug coverage . As Bill noted , you would need to purchase a separate Part D prescription plan . It 's best to get the Part D plan when you are in your initial Open Enrollment Period . If you do not have continuous creditable drug coverage , you will be penalized and charged a fee on top of your Part D premium .
No . In today 's marketplace , if you have/want to purchase a Medigap plan and want prescription drug coverage , you would need to enroll in a stand-alone Part D plan . These can be set-up during the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP -RRB- or if/when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- SEP -RRB- such as new to Medicare . Up until a few years ago , Medigap plans did offer prescription coverage under plans E , H , I , and J. Changes were made to the law that forced these plans to be taken off the market and would require you to buy prescription coverage through a stand-alone plan . If you purchased one of these plans before they were removed from the marketplace , you could keep them . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends a lot on which Medigap Plan you have . Medigap Plans are designed to cover most of what original Medicare Part A & Part B does not cover . However , all Medigap Plans do not have prescription drug coverage . You would need to get a Part D plan in addition to cover prescriptions . This is a good thing because you will be able to change your drug plan as your prescription needs change without needing to change your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans also do not cover dental and vision , however , you can get a separate dental/vision plan . The quickest way to find out what Medigap Plans cover and is to go to our website . You can compare Medigap Plans instantly online at SummitMedigap.com .
Some Medigap Plans sold in the past did cover prescription drugs ; however , Medigap Policies sold after January 1 , 2006 are not allowed to include coverage for prescription drugs . Medigap Plans fill in the `` gaps '' that original Medicare does not cover . So it will pay for approved Medicare items . With that said , Medicare only covers a limited amount of drugs . Examples include : injections recieved in the doctor 's office , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , some types of drugs used with various durable medical equipment -LRB- ex : nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- , and under extremely limited circumstances , certain drugs you receive in a outpatient hospital setting . Some drugs in a hospital setting are known as `` self-administered drugs '' -LRB- drugs you normally take on your own -RRB- . These are not covered by Part B and , therefore , not paid for by your Medigap Plan .
It ultimately depends on what prescription drug plan you have . Not all drug plans are the same . The list of covered drugs -LRB- also known as a formulary for Medicare programs -RRB- will tell you whether your Cialis prescription will be covered . If it 's listed as a covered drug , then you would only pay your share of the expense -LRB- deductible , copay , and/or coinsurance , etc. -RRB- . If it 's not a covered drug , then you would be responsible for 100 % of the cost . It may simply be that the prescription drug plan you have does not cover this specific drug . \ At age 71 , I 'm assuming you 're on Medicare . If so , regardless of whether your drug coverage is under a Medicare Advantage plan or through a stand-alone Part D plan , you would not be able to make any changes to your drug coverage until the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15 - December 7 of each year -RRB- . During the annual enrollment period , you can evaluate your options to see which carrier 's plan will cover this prescription . If you 're covered under an employer plan , options may be limited , but if more than one option is available , I would recommend reviewing each of them to see which plan will be most suitable for your needs . If it 's an individual poilcy , I recommend contacting the agent who placed the covered for you -LRB- that person would be the servicing agent for the program -RRB- or call your insurance carrier directly to find out if it should be a covered drug under your plan . If you have a group policy , then you would need to either contact the carrier directly or your human resources department should be able to put you in contact with the appropriate person . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Generally speaking , a Medigap policy will not cover prescription drugs . However , certain prescribed drugs covered under Medicare part B qualify for coverage under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs require enrollment into a part D prescription drug plan . I recommend locating a licensed agent specializing in Medicare/prescription drug plans to find the prescription plan the best suits your needs ...
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Enrollment in a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan -LRB- Part D / PDP -RRB- is not mandatory . However , if you do not enroll in a Medicare approved Prescription Drug Plan , youll still need creditable prescription drug coverage to avoid a late enrollment penalty if you decide to enroll later on . To avoid the late enrollment penalty : Join a Medicare drug plan when you are first eligible and before your initial enrollment period is over . Dont allow 63 days or more in a row without a Medicare drug plan or other creditable prescription drug coverage . If you choose to delay getting a PDP plan , you are not penalized until you decide to enroll . This does come as a surprise to some people who choose to wait to buy a Medicare PDP plan after being on Medicare for some time . To calculate a late enrollment penalty fee , first determine how many months you went without creditable drug coverage . For example 43 months at a rate of $ 31.17 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- is 43 X .3117 = $ 13.40 . So , in addition to the monthly PDP premium , you would pay a $ 13.40 late enrollment penalty . You may have to pay this penalty for as long as you have a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan . In addition , the penalty rate may increase each year . This was a great question . I hope this answer was helpful .
Azilect is a medication that is covered under Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . You have to be enrolled in Original Medicare to get a Part D plan . You can also enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- like an HMO or PPO -RRB- that includes Part D prescription drug coverage . Any drugs that are covered under Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- are ones that get administered in a doctor 's office -LRB- injections -RRB- , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , drugs used with some types of durable medical equipment -LRB- nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- . Sometimes drugs are covered under very limited circumstances -LRB- certain drugs in a hospital outpatient setting -RRB- . Since it falls under Part B , you pay the 20 % of Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . If you feel like you need help paying for your Medicare prescription drug costs , you can contact Social Security -LRB- 1-800-772-1213 -RRB- to apply for Extra Help . According to CMS , Extra Help is a `` Medicare program to help people with limited income and resources pay medicare prescription drug plan costs , like premiums , deductibles , and coinsurance . ''
I believe what you 're referring to is Plan E - it 's a Medicare supplement plan that used to be available in the Medigap marketplace - in short , it was a Medicare supplement plan that included prescription drug coverage . In June 2010 , rules regarding Medicare supplement plans were restructured and supplement plans could no longer include prescription drug coverage . Therefore , plans E , H , I , and J were no longer available for purchase . To get a similar plan structure today , you need to purchase either a plan F , G , or N -LRB- the most comparable Medigap plans to plan E -RRB- and a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . If you have an existing one that was already in force before the changes , you can keep it as Medicare supplement plans are guaranteed renewable .
As of June 1 , 2010 Medigap policies no longer can offer coverage for outpatient prescription drugs . Federal requlation requires that all Medicare beneficiaries have creditable prescription drug coverage . There are four ways to accomplish this : Drug coverage via an employer plan or retirement medical plan through a prior employer . Drug coverage via a Union retiree health plan . Veteran 's Administration -LRB- VA -RRB- drug coverage , available to certain veterans . A Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plan . All the best to you . Mark
Adderall is a type of prescription and would therefore be covered under your health plan 's prescription drug coverage . Which tier level it may fall under can vary from plan-to-plan , meaning how much you pay for the prescription may be higher under some plans and lower under others . Tiers are generally broken down in to 4 or 5 categories - some combination of preferred generics , non-preferred generics , preferred brand-name drugs , non-preferred brand-name drugs , and specialty drugs -LRB- some plans classify preferred and non-preferred specialty drugs -RRB- . If you 're unsure , you can contact the carrier -LRB- or your agent -RRB- to find out if that specific prescription will be covered by your health plan and/or what portion of the expense they cover and what your portion of the expense would be -LRB- your copayment or coinsurance -RRB- .
Medigap Plan F -LRB- also known as Medicare Supplement Plan F -RRB- is the most comprehensive plan on the market . You would have no copays , deductibles or coinsurance . There is also no network so you can go to any doctor or hospital in any state that you want . If they take Medicare they will take the Medigap Plan regardless of who the carrier is . The only thing Plan F does n't cover is your prescription drugs . All Medigap plans are not allowed to include prescriptions so it would be the same with any of them . People with a Medigap Plan also get a Part D to cover the prescriptions .
Medigap plans do not cover drugs . They use to until a few years ago when Medigap plans E , H , I , and J were taken off of the marketplace due to changes in the Medicare laws . If you have a Medigap plan and want to have coverage for prescription drugs , you would need to secure a standalone Part D prescription drug plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , Medigap policies do not cover drugs , but you can add a standalone Part D prescription drug plan to cover them . Medigap policies used to cover prescription drugs under plans E , H , I , and J , but these plans were removed from the marketplace several years ago . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medicare coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap and Med Advantage plans are SIGNIFICANTLY different . For a MedAdvantage Plan , they are basically like an HMO . You have a primary physician who is essentially the gate keeper . You do need referrals and you do have co-pays . A Med Advantage plan does also contain a drug plan component , which the supplements do not . If you have significant health issues , than of course the co-pays can add up , however the monthly premium is usually significantly less than the average Medigap plan . Medigap Plans again , are significantly different . The coverage provided by a Medigap Plan is dependent upon what plan you get . The plans are all identified by a corresponding letter . For example , an F Plan tends to offer the most solid coverage , but of course the price is among the highest as you 'd expect . Each lettered plan is written and designed by the government , so no F Plan is different than another , no G is different than another G , etc etc. . What is different is what each individual insurance company charges for the play . So it 's not uncommon for company A to charge 1 price for an F Plan , and companies B , C , D , & E all have significantly different prices for the exact SAME COVERAGE . One thing that I would do is make sure you understand how each lettered plan works , because the difference in coverage can be quite significant . For example , make sure you understand exactly what a `` Part B Excess Charge '' is . In some states , such as PA , they are illegal , but in my state , which is NJ they are perfectly legal . If you purchase a plan that does n't cover the Part B Excess Charge , you could find yourself pleasantly surprised by a significant bill if you ever have a major procedure done . Medigap Plans DO NOT come with a drug plan , or vision plan or dental . A Drug Plan is the only one you are REQUIRED to get , or you could face a penalty by the government . But again , the drug plan must be purchased on the side , as there is no such thing as a Medigap that comes with a drug plan .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Why Is Renters Insurance So Important ?
Renters insurance will help protect you and your family from potential financial hardship due to a covered accident that you are deemed responsible for . Without renters insurance if a person visiting you is hurt while at your premise you may be responsible for their medical expenses and other costs . Renters insurance will typically provide personally liability coverage and personal property protection along with some loss of use coverage . Contact a local agent to discuss coverage availability and cost within your geographic location .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
Why some apartments require renters insurance can vary . First , lets cover what renters insurance covers . It covers your personal property , your liability and medical expenses . Second , your liability and medical coverage are the parts that are most important to the apartment . This is because your liability insurance can be used to cover damage done to the building due to your negligence . For example , lets say you leave the stove on and you leave your apartment . Lets further say it starts a fire and causes damage to the building . The apartment 's insurance will pay for the damages , but then it will subrogate against your insurance -LRB- meaning it will make a claim against your renters coverage -RRB- . Therefore , many apartment complexes ' insurance companies will require that all the tenants have a renters policy so it can recoup any of its losses caused by the apartment complex 's tenants .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
Have to assume that you are talking about liability here . A good renters policy will provide coverage for the policyholder for liability that is attributed to and ultimately proven to be his or hers . Usually the property owner/landlord is the first person who is liable but there easily can be circumstances where the renter can be held liable for accidents involving both in-ground and above-ground pools , either primarily or secondarily . So , it is easy to see why it it is extremely important that renters obtain policies that will cover them for potential liability of this nature and otherwise .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
I assume that you mean failed as in `` did not pay what it guaranteed '' . Annuities are backed by the claims paying ability of the Insurance company that issued the policy . This is why it is very important to consider the financial rating of the company you use . Since 2008 , there have only been 3 `` B '' rated insurance companies that have failed . There have been more C , D , & E rated companies that have failed , but not many . And most of the ones that did were D rated or worse . Since 2008 there have been no B + or better companies that have failed . -LRB- Actually its longer than that , but the records I currently have access to only go back that far . But I am not personally aware of any insurance companies that were A rated at time of failure -RRB- This is why most agents recommend using a B + , or better yet , an A rated company . It is also important to point out that just because an insurance company fails , does not mean the annuity fails to pay . Insurance companies are highly regulated . And the states all have a safety net type system set up to help secure the guarantees made by failing insurance companies . Visit WEBSITELINK for more info on what happens in the event of an insolvency . But it is important to remember that whatever safety net might exist . It is no substitute for a solid financial rating . There are way too many well rated companies to use a poorly rated one .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
There are two basic reasons why you would need Renters ' Insurance . First , if you are required by the building owner to have it as a condition of your lease . But to me , the most important reason to have it is because you may be renting your home , but you own your personal property and have worked darned hard to get it . So unless you happen to have an extra $ 50,000 laying around , talk to your Insurance Professional about buying a Renters ' policy that will guarantee to replace everything at full current value . It 'll be one of the smartest $ 300 purchases you may make .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
Life insurance quotes are an estimation of the premiums you would pay for a given life insurance coverage structure -LRB- face amount and term length -RRB- . However , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . So if you run a quote at the most preferred rates and have n't factored in your height/weight , medications used , medical conditions , family medical history , tobacco usage , driving history issues , participation in extreme/hazardous activities , and a number of other factors , then the quote figures you ran are pretty much useless as they do not represent an accurate picture for the proposed coverage . The risk classification is the MOST IMPORTANT part of any quote an insurance agent gives you because the risk classification determines the premiums for the coverage . The final risk class a carrier approves you at after underwriting your policy will tell you what premiums the carrier will require for the coverage to be active . Many individuals like to see quotes with the most preferred rates -LRB- preferred plus risk class -RRB- as they are the cheapest cost and then they end up thinking that 's what they should get -LRB- and if they do n't get it , then they will forget the entire process and not even bother securing any coverage at all -RRB- . What you apply for is not always what you get - not everyone qualifies for the best rates . For example , if you have a major medical condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack , diabetic , had cancer , etc. -RRB- and the quote that was ran was for a preferred plus risk class , you 're wasting your time applying for it because every carrier is going to offer a higher risk class -LRB- and therefore require higher premiums -RRB- for the coverage -LRB- or possibly decline or postpone you for coverage depending on the details of the medical history -RRB- . This is why it 's critical to work with an experienced , knowledgeable , independent life insurance broker who knows the right questions to ask and can shop the case among multiple companies so they can give you the most accurate quotes up front that represent a realistic expectation of what you can expect to pay for the desired life insurance program . An important note : You NEVER want to just apply to a bunch of companies to see what sticks as this actually works against you because it 's a red flag to insurance companies when they complete the MIB check during underwriting -LRB- Medical Information Bureau - every carrier checks this because if you were declined by other companies , they want to know why -RRB- . You want to have your best -LRB- and most accurate -RRB- estimate up front so you get it right the first time so you can get the best rates for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Companies make money from life insurance premiums . If the number of death claims causes the life insurance company to pay out more than is brought in , the company needs to go into reserves to pay claims . That is why it is so important for life insurance companies to be financially sound , and it is also why underwriting for a life insurance policy usually requires an exam . The life insurance company is protecting itself , and its policyholders , by assessing risk accurately .
Why is whole life good ? Well there have been several answers that will cover the bases pretty well . A locked in premium , tax deferred growth , a death benefit that grows over time , etc. . Let me give you another reason . a reason that you may not realize until later in life if something happens to you but does n't kill you . That 's right people get sick . Diabetes , high blood pressure , heart problems and so on can and actually do happen to a large segment of our population . The reason I want to point out pertains to the things I just mentioned . Why is whole life good ? Because they ca n't take it away from you . YOU control the policy . The price ca n't go up , the policy ca n't really run out of years and end prematurely . Why is that important ? When I got sick with my type II , hyper tension and recently AFIB , what a reassurance it was to KNOW I was still in control of my policies , that they were n't going to end or explode in price on me . Whole life is expensive because it 's a product the INSURED controls . Cheers .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Necessary For A Mortgage ?
Life insurance is not necessary to get most mortgages . If you put down under 20 % for the down payment , you may be required to get PMI -LRB- Private Mortgage Insurance -RRB- in order to obtain the mortgage . That is not regular life insurance , but a policy created just for the purpose of paying off what you owe the lender , in the event of your death . Many people do choose to buy term life insurance to pay off their mortgage , so that their loved ones can stay in the home if they were to pass while the mortgage is not yet paid off .
It depends on your definition of `` necessary '' . It used to be common practice for mortgage companies to sell credit life insurance that would pay the mortgage in the case of the borrower 's death . These policies are n't sold much anymore because they were n't really a good value for the borrower . The rates were high and the death benefits fell over time with the balance of the mortgage . It 's usually a good practice to have life insurance in place to pay off any debts you have including a mortgage . To do this the right way you really need to consider the bigger picture of your life . A mortgage is just one piece of the puzzle that is your financial life . When considering how much life insurance you need , you have to determine what will happen if you die and where that will leave the survivors . Find an agent you can trust and go through the process of this planning . Nobody likes thinking about their death , but the situation exists whether you plan for it or not .
The term ` Escrow ' has a double meaning . Escrow is utilized mainly in the Western States as the legal process of closing the purchase or refinancing transaction of real property ; Escrow Companies exist to facilitate the purchase , sale & refinancing of real property transactions . In States where Escrow Companies are not used , Mortgage and Title Companies utilize ` Closing Professionals ' to facilitate the same process . During the Escrow/Closing process , if a mortgage is involved , it is customary for the mortgage lender to require that all taxes are current and property insurance is paid in full for the first year . Escrow companies will be charged with the fiduciary responsibility to assure the mortgage company upon funding that both conditions have been met and proven . The term Escrow is also used synonymously with a Mortgage Impound Account which is simply a savings account setup for the purpose of saving funds in preparation of making payments to renew property insurance and property taxes ; a mortgage company or bank will simply calculate the necessary amount to be deposited into the Escrow/Impound account monthly in order for a shortage not to exist when future property tax and future property insurance invoices are presented . The monthly calculation usually involves the addition of the annual property tax and the annual property insurance , a 10 % safety buffer is added , then the total is divided by 12 . The account is an interest bearing account and an annual assessment summary is sent to the mortgage holder at the end of each year . There is usually no charge associated with having this account ; it is simply to facilitate payments without the burden of a large obligation at one time for the mortgage holder . It is important for homeowners to understand the escrow and/or impound process as there seems to be many misconceptions of how the process works . It is a very simple process but the most confusing to the ley person is the fact that he/she is actually depositing a monthly savings amount into an account which will pay future invoices presented . Property Taxes are generally invoiced twice a year and Homeowners Insurance is generally invoiced once a year ; money is saved on a monthly basis in order for the funds to be present when the invoices arrive . For a further and/or more detailed explanation , you may wish to contact your Real Estate , Mortgage and or Escrow/Closing Professional directly .
Life insurance is not necessary to get most mortgages . If you put down under 20 % for the down payment , you may be required to get PMI -LRB- Private Mortgage Insurance -RRB- in order to obtain the mortgage . That is not regular life insurance , but a policy created just for the purpose of paying off what you owe the lender , in the event of your death . Many people do choose to buy term life insurance to pay off their mortgage , so that their loved ones can stay in the home if they were to pass while the mortgage is not yet paid off .
It depends on your definition of `` necessary '' . It used to be common practice for mortgage companies to sell credit life insurance that would pay the mortgage in the case of the borrower 's death . These policies are n't sold much anymore because they were n't really a good value for the borrower . The rates were high and the death benefits fell over time with the balance of the mortgage . It 's usually a good practice to have life insurance in place to pay off any debts you have including a mortgage . To do this the right way you really need to consider the bigger picture of your life . A mortgage is just one piece of the puzzle that is your financial life . When considering how much life insurance you need , you have to determine what will happen if you die and where that will leave the survivors . Find an agent you can trust and go through the process of this planning . Nobody likes thinking about their death , but the situation exists whether you plan for it or not .
This is generally quite simple and a process that the mortgage company understands . Apply for the new homeowners insurance policy . When the policy is issued the insurance company will provide evidence of insurance and an invoice to the mortgage company . It may be necessary for you to contact your previous insurance company but your agent will probably assist in notifying the former insurance company . The mortgage company will balance the returned premium from the previous policy with the premium requirement from the new policy .
Generally Bank owned life insurance is designed to protect the bank if you take out a loan . I usually recommend buying your own policy . It gives your beneficiary more options . For example , mortgage insurance is usually offered by a bank . It can also be purchased on your own . Both would pay off the mortgage if you die . With the bank owned policy , that is the only choice . What if your spouse does n't want or need to pay off the mortgage however . This is not always the best option . If you own the policy , your wife or beneficiary may choose to invest the life insurance funds and use the interest to help make mortgage payments . Or the money would be more advantageous elsewhere . Mortgage life insurance with the bank is tied to that mortgage . What if you move ? Owning your own policy is portable , you can take it with you to your new home . I usually recommend level term to cover a mortgage . That way you have extra protection as your mortgage decreases because the death benefit will stay level . With a banks mortgage life insurance it just pays off the mortgage to the bank on that loan . Yes it works , but you are better off with your own policy .
The Mortgage itself is a Loan Account setting up a method of repayment ; the repayment structure includes interest over the term of the loan . Monthly payments on a mortgage loan account are sometimes referred to as : P&I -LRB- Principal and Interest -RRB- . At the request of the customer and in some cases , as a requirement to the mortgage contract , an Impound Account -LRB- Escrow Account -RRB- will be initiated in order to accommodate the bi-annual payment of property taxes as well as an annual payment of home insurance . This account will pay a nominal interest rate credited to the account at the end of each year . If the customer has an Impound Account , the monthly mortgage payments will include a monthly savings amount which will be deposited directly into the impound -LRB- escrow -RRB- account in order to accumulate funds to pay future tax and insurance invoices . Regarding Homeowners Insurance , the policy must be purchased by the homeowner and the mortgage company must be listed as the Mortgage Loss Payee ; copies of all documents will be mailed to the mortgage company including invoices . If a homeowner does not purchase home insurance , the mortgage contract allows the mortgage company to place ` Forced Insurance ' on the property and charge the surcharged premium to the mortgage account ; this is not in the interest of the homeowner and should be avoided in the interest of premium amount and coverage afforded . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Life insurance is usually not required as a stipulation of getting a mortgage unless the down payment is very low . Then the borrower is required to buy a type of insurance called `` PMI '' , or Private Mortgage Insurance . This coverage would pay the lender what is owed to them in the case of the borrower 's death . However , many people do use regular life insurance to cover their mortgages . Term life insurance can be purchased in the same number of years as the mortgage ; is a reasonable cost for that what can be a large amount of coverage ; the benefit does not decrease as the mortgage goes down ; and it goes to the beneficiary of your choice . Especially with today 's low mortgage rates , it may not be in the best interest of the beneficiary to pay off the mortgage . Having a life insurance benefit to invest or pay other bills could allow the survivor to keep paying the mortgage and keep the home . Or they could pay it off and keep the remainder of the life insurance proceeds .
While a good idea , it is not required by law to purchase a life insurance policy in order to get a mortgage . I assume what you are referring to is Mortgage Protection Insurance -LRB- MPI -RRB- , which would pay your beneficiary so that they could pay off your mortgage in the event of your death . This is not to be confused with Private Mortgage Insurance -LRB- PMI -RRB- which is required to protect the lender in case of foreclosure , and is a legitimate requirement for borrowers who can not put down over 19 % on a home . The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau announced a crackdown this month -LRB- April , 2013 -RRB- on mortgage insurers who give kickbacks to mortgage lenders in return for business . So do n't let your lender make you purchase mortgage insurance from a certain company in order to get a mortgage . If you do wish to protect your mortgage in the case of your death , buying a simple level Term policy is often the most cost effective solution .
Life insurance coverage depends on how long the economic liability is . For example the earnings of the family bread winners are necessary to pay a 30 year home mortgage , so 30 years of coverage may be necessary as well . Buy term lifeinsuranceif the economic liability is temporary . Buypermanentlife insurance if the economic liability is perpetual .
You do not need to have life insurance with a mortgage . If you borrow more than a certain amount , you will need to purchase PMI -LRB- private mortgage insurance -RRB- that will repay the lender what is owed them , if you pass away . Life insurance , on the other hand , will pay off your entire mortgage and leave the excess to your beneficiary to pay other bills . If your mortgage interest rate is so low that your beneficiary wants to keep paying the mortgage and invest the life insurance proceeds , they can so that , with regular life insurance . So , while life insurance is not required with a mortgage , it is an excellent idea .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The need for life insurance for most people increases with debt . The fact that your question states that you have a new mortgage suggests you now have a new debt . If you or your spouse or partner were to die and that income is lost , would it be a burden to the other loved one to cover this new debt ? If the answer is yes , you need additional life insurance . If you just closed on the new house you will soon receive or be bombarded is probably a better way to describe it , with letters about mortgage life insurance . These letters will look as if they are being sent by your mortgage company , but chances are they are not . Life insurance companies pay mortgage lenders for their lists and their logos to create leads to sell decreasing mortgage insurance . As you pay off your mortgage through the years , the face amount or benefit to your loved ones decreases , because you owe less to the bank . If you purchase a guaranteed level term life insurance policy , then your loved ones get the difference not the insurance company . If you have a 30 year mortgage for $ 200,000 , purchase a $ 200,000 30 year level term policy to cover that debt for your loved ones . When you pay off the mortgge drop the insurance coverage . Never leave a loved one holding excess debt when you die .
Anytime something major changes in your life it 's a good idea to evaluate the amount of insurance coverage you need . With a mortgage I would recommend a term policy that covers the length of your mortgage . If your mortgage is 20 years purchase a 20 year gauranteed level term , or for a 30 year mortgage purchase a 30 year term . This is the most economical way to protect you and your family if a tragedy occurs . If soemthing happens your spouse has the funds to pay off the mortgage . If not your cost remains level while the mortgage is in force and goes away when the mortgage is paid off . To save money you may want to ask your insurance agent about layering the term policies to cover your mortgage .
If you have regular Disability Insurance , you will receive a monthly benefit in the event that you became disabled . This can be used to pay any bills you want it to pay , including , but not restricted to , your mortgage . So Mortgage Disability Insurance is not necessary if you have regular Disability Insurance . Whether it is a good idea depends on your situation .
Retirement should be about reducing stress . In order to do this we need to evaluate those things that could happen and develop strategies for dealing with them . At a minimum this will mean maintaining proper insurance coverage on your auto and home . It well might mean purchasing life insurance for the specific purpose of creating a legacy for those you love . If you do that you can spend your assets without any thought of conserving them for your heirs . The most pressing risk according to surveys is the risk of living too long . None of us wants to run out of money . The possibility of living a long time in retirement is quite high . Imbedded in this risk is the likelihood of a needing medical care and custodial care . Another risk is the result of the economy . It could go through major shifts and investments might have a period of decline that could jeopardize your retirement . At that point it is unlikely that you would be able to do anything about it as our ability to work diminishes with every passing year . Another risk that we face is that we could lose our spouse . This is inevitable but it could come sooner rather than later and that could have a profound impact on available money and support . Widows are often faced with very tough economic realities . Long term care requirements are the number one reason why a wealthier person would run out of assets in retirement . There are several strategies to address this risk including long term care insurance . There are several things a person can do to increase their income in retirement . One of the most significant things is to carefully select the date when social security and pension benefits start . The social security benefits increase the longer a worker waits up to the age of 70 . This increases the benefit to a widow as well , should the worker die first . People often own a home . The value of a home minus the mortgage is known as home equity . This home equity can be used to derive income . A reverse mortgage can be put in place that will allow a person to remain in their home and yet withdraw loans against the home for income in retirement . The need for tax planning certainly doesnt end at retirement . There are tax-saving decisions available that will expand income . Your assets are not all taxed in the same way and by converting assets to income in a tax wise manner can save a great deal and expand spendable income in retirement . In all strategies there are trade-offs . If you take a reverse mortgage on the home the amount you can leave your children declines . There will be years in which medical expenses will greatly reduce your taxable income . A Roth IRA provides income that isnt subject to tax which could be a benefit to keep your income in a lower income tax rate bracket . One of the things that I think is most important in developing strategies for retirement is to establish decision points . These are dates or times when you and your spouse or perhaps including your children decide on where you will live , who will provide care if necessary , what assets can be gifted and other important decisions . I am getting ready for one of those conferences even as I write this . It is important to make decisions before there is a crisis . A widow told me a few days ago that moving out of her home into a down-sized facility was one of the most difficult tasks she had ever performed . The emotional and physical toll was enormous . She had planned to make the move several years in the future and she is convinced that she would hot have been able to make the decision , let along , and make the move at that later date . Decide now when you will downsize . Decide now who will assist you or when you will begin to get outside help . There are so many decisions and it is always best to make them before it is absolutely necessary . These decisions can have a profound effect on insuring the financial success of your retirement .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Mortgage life insurance works very similar to a traditional life insurance policy - in short , a premium is paid to an insurance company and a death benefit is paid by the company to the beneficiary in the event the insured dies during the life of the policy . There is one key difference between traditional life insurance policies and mortgage life insurance - the structure of the policy death benefit.Traditional policies feature a level death benefit for the life of the policy along with level premiums for a specified term -LRB- or guaranteed forever -RRB- . Mortgage life insurance features level premiums , but have a decreasing death benefit - much like how a mortgage works -LRB- hence the name -RRB- . In today 's marketplace , the rates/premiums for a traditional policy are very competitive with mortgage insurance rates .
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Why Should I Open A Roth IRA ?
Any step made to accumulate money for retirement is a step in the right direction . The money accumulated in a Roth IRA can be withdrawn after 5 years income tax free and without the additional 10 % penalty tax if you are over 59.5 years old , have become disabled or are using the money for a first time home purchase . Additional advantages of a Roth IRA are that there will not be a minimum distribution required when you reach age 70.5 , and there are superior estate tax opportunities .
That is a great question ! There are several reasons why opening a Roth makes sense . The first is that the minimum distribution and withdrawal requirements are much less strict than in traditional IRA 's , and can have beneficiaries to receive the balances when you pass . This type of IRA will allow you to take money out without penalties under the right circumstances where a traditional IRA wo n't . They are also great to have because they are not taxable income when you do start taking cash from them . The funding for your Roth is done after-tax , and the earnings are also tax favored , making this a great investment vehicle . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
A Roth IRA is not related to etrade in any direct way unless you simply have your Roth IRA as part of your etrade account . Let 's look at the basic definitions . A Roth IRA is an Individual Retirement Arrangement -LRB- see IRS Publication 590 -RRB- that is generally not taxed if you meet certain conditions . Your Roth IRA can contain a wide variety of financial products including stocks , bonds , mutual funds , CDs , annuities and much more . Etrade is generally considered an online discount stock brokerage service for self-directed investors . You can open a Roth IRA at thousands of institutions . One of those financial institutions is etrade . Whether that would be `` good '' is largely dependent on you and your choices of how you invest your Roth IRA funds .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
There are several rules that determine your eligibility to open a Roth IRA . 1 -RRB- You must first have an income . Did you have earned income in the current tax year ? 2 -RRB- If you earned income , did your income exceed the limits set by the federal government ? This income limit changes every year and is depends on your marital status and tax filing status to determine the maximum income . You qualify for a Roth IRA based upon your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You can not contribute more into a Roth IRA than you earned in income . For example , if you earned $ 5,000 for 2014 , that is your maximum contribution . 4 -RRB- The contribution limit in 2014 was $ 5,500 maximum . 5 -RRB- There is no maximum age where you are limited or prohibited from making a contribution to a Roth IRA . 6 -RRB- You are not required to take a mandatory distribution at age 70.5 like qualified IRA 's . 7 -RRB- You can contribute to a Roth IRA even if you participate in a retirement plan at work . Depending on circumstances there may be other rules but this gives you a few ideas .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
While IRA 's are technically not `` qualified '' they are generally lumped into the qualified category due to their tax treatment . Based on the question , I 'm going to assume that an IRA will suffice for your intentions . To open an IRA there are a few ways to approach this goal : 1 . You can choose an asset issued by a company who will act as custodian and open an IRA with that company . Examples of this include specific mutual funds or annuities and opening an IRA with the issuing company 2 . In some cases you can open a general IRA and place numerous investment products in the IRA , this can sometimes be tricky and depends on the custodian with whom you open the IRA with 's rule regarding available products in the IRA 3 . You can open a self directed IRA and place pretty much whatever you want into it so long as it 's an allowable asset under current US law . The third option involves considerable more cost to establish the IRA but also leaves you with the most flexibility in term of what goes into the IRA and how it is funded .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
That is a great question ! There are several reasons why opening a Roth makes sense . The first is that the minimum distribution and withdrawal requirements are much less strict than in traditional IRA 's , and can have beneficiaries to receive the balances when you pass . This type of IRA will allow you to take money out without penalties under the right circumstances where a traditional IRA wo n't . They are also great to have because they are not taxable income when you do start taking cash from them . The funding for your Roth is done after-tax , and the earnings are also tax favored , making this a great investment vehicle . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
You should purchase a Roth IRA if you suspect that the rate of tax on your income might be higher when you retire than it is now . You should purchase a Roth IRA if you want to have tax free income when you meet qualifying events . You should purchase a Roth IRA if you want to avoid mandatory distributions and having your distribution taxed as ordinary income . You should purchase a Roth IRA if you are young or old or want to have flexibility when you retire .
A Roth IRA isnt better . A Roth IRA is different . Contributions for a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- reduce your current income tax . Contributions to a Roth IRA do not . Distributions from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are fully taxable as ordinary income . Distributions from a Roth IRA are not taxable at all . The limits to how much you can put into a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are quite generous . The limits to contributions to a Roth IRA are restrictive . There are taxes and possible penalties if you withdraw money from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- prior to age 59.5 . You can withdraw from the capital invested from a Roth IRA without tax consequences . There are advantages to both .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is A 5 Year Term Life Insurance ?
5 Year Term Life Insurance is insurance that the premium stays level for a 5 year period and then increases . The policy will renew at a higher premium until it expires at a given age age 85 for example . The premiums are low initially until , the become very high in the later years . Usually , this type of insurance is convertible to a level premium permanent insurance plan until a given age say age 65 . 10 year term life plans have become much more popular than the 5 year plans . An independent insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have any questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
5 Year Term Life Insurance has the premiums locked in for 5 years . People who have a short term loan are the most common seekers of of 5 year Term that I see . In reality , the cost of 5 year Term is often higher than 10 year Term because there are so few companies that offer five year Term Life Insurance . When you buy Term Life , you can drop it at any time without penalty . So getting 10 year Term may be your better choice .
That is a great question ! A 5 year term policy is exactly what it sounds like . It is a life insurance policy that has a 5 year lifespan . At the end of the 5 year term , the policy and coverageend . This type of policy is typically purchased to cover a debt , that is usually repaid within that time period . Term life policies have no value unless you were to pass away during the term , and can be renewed , but the renewal premiums start at 110 % of what you paid before , and increase dramatically . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
The only reason to carry a 5 year level term is for a 5 year or less debt . Typically 5 year term is harder to find as many carriers start at 10 year term . I find in shopping that you can purchase 10 year term cheaper than buying a 5 year term just because of competition . If your need for life insurance is greater than 5 years seek the advice of an independent life insurance broker . Term life insurance policies rates increase as much as ten fold at the end of the term and force most back into the market . You will be 5 years older and perhaps not in as good of health .
The only reason to carry a 5 year level term is for a 5 year or less debt . Typically 5 year term is harder to find as many carriers start at 10 year term . I find in shopping that you can purchase 10 year term cheaper than buying a 5 year term just because of competition . If your need for life insurance is greater than 5 years seek the advice of an independent life insurance broker . Term life insurance policies rates increase as much as ten fold at the end of the term and force most back into the market . You will be 5 years older and perhaps not in as good of health .
A 5 year Term Life Insurance policy has the rate locked in for 5 years . In my experience , the premiums for 5 year Term policies often exceed the premiums for 10 year Term , because there are far fewer companies that offer 5 year Term . If you purchase a 10 year Term policy and only want to keep it 5 years , you can simply cancel it after 5 years with no penalty .
5 Year Term Life Insurance has the premiums locked in for 5 years . People who have a short term loan are the most common seekers of of 5 year Term that I see . In reality , the cost of 5 year Term is often higher than 10 year Term because there are so few companies that offer five year Term Life Insurance . When you buy Term Life , you can drop it at any time without penalty . So getting 10 year Term may be your better choice .
Just as the name sounds , a 5 year term insurance policy only guarantees the premiums will remain the same for the first 5 years - after that the policy becomes annually renewable and the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- . Many companies feature a minimum 10 year policy and the rates are often cheaper to secure a 10 year term policy than a 5 year policy . Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure is commonly seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- .
5 year term life insurance is life insurance that will usually stay the same price for 5 years . Not many companies sell 5 year term life , so the prices may not be as competitive as 10 year term , which is more popular and thus , often used in place of 5 year Term . There is no penalty to drop term life insurance before the term is up .
Short term life insurance is generally thought of as term life insurance that comes in terms of 1 , 5 or 10 years . One year Term , or Annually Renewable Term , can be helpful for someone in between jobs or some other need for very short term coverage . However , one year Term will go up in price each year , and sometimes you need to re-qualify every year . So locking in a longer term is much easier and more cost effective if you need more than a couple years of coverage . Five year Term is hard to find , and thus the prices are not as competitive as one would think . I have found that ten year Term rates often run as low or lower than five year Term . Since there is no penalty to drop Term life insurance , you may as well take the longer term and then just drop it if you do n't need it the whole ten years . Ten year Term policies are common and competitively priced . Again , if you need longer coverage , it can cost less to lock the rate in longer while you are younger and your health is good . But if you are going for short term coverage , 10 or 15 year Term can be a good way to go .
The cheapest life insurance is usually annually renewable term , followed by 10 year term . Annually renewable term goes up in price every year , and 10 year term goes up in price every 10 years . Some companies carry 5 year term , but there are so few choices that 10 year term rates often beat the rates of 5 year term . Whether that type of short term policy is best for you depends on your need for the life insurance . E.g. . If you are purchasing it to pay for your funeral , you run the very real risk of being unable to afford the policy by the time you die . In that case , buying permanent insurance is usually a better choice , even if it starts out costing more . However , if you only need your policy for a few years , getting a short term policy is most likely your best and cheapest choice .
As mentioned above , a 5 year term insurance is an insurance policy that is in force for 5 years then expires . It is designed for a short term need and or specifically for the purpose of converting to a Whole Life policy within that 5 year period . Most Term policies are `` convertible '' to permanent insurance and some companies limit the type of permanent insurance their term policies may be converted to . In `` converting '' a term to a permanent policy what happens is the face amount of the Term , or a portion of that amount is converted to a Whole Life or Universal life policy without the insured having to undergo additional medical testing or underwriting . The premiums paid to the Term policy are not credited to the new permanent policy and the new premium will be based on the current age of the insured .
That is a great question ! A 5 year term policy is exactly what it sounds like . It is a life insurance policy that has a 5 year lifespan . At the end of the 5 year term , the policy and coverageend . This type of policy is typically purchased to cover a debt , that is usually repaid within that time period . Term life policies have no value unless you were to pass away during the term , and can be renewed , but the renewal premiums start at 110 % of what you paid before , and increase dramatically . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
5 Year Term Life Insurance is insurance that the premium stays level for a 5 year period and then increases . The policy will renew at a higher premium until it expires at a given age age 85 for example . The premiums are low initially until , the become very high in the later years . Usually , this type of insurance is convertible to a level premium permanent insurance plan until a given age say age 65 . 10 year term life plans have become much more popular than the 5 year plans . An independent insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have any questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
I would not say that whole life is better than term life . It really depends on the clients need for life insurance . Whole life insurance name is literal , it is a face amount of life insurance that will last your whole life at a fixed premium . It is typically more expensive than term when your young therefore the face amount is typically less than a term insurance counter part . It is however much more affordable in later years because of the fixed rate . Term life insurance is typically more affordable in younger years with a fixed time period of level premiums such as 5-10-15-20-30-35 years . Term life insurance is used to cover a time period of debt such a mortgage . For example you purchase a home with a $ 250,000 mortgage for 30 years . It would be prudent to purchase a $ 250,000 30 year term policy as well . Try to avoid mortgage life insurance unless you are uninsurable . This term is known as decreasing term life and reduces as the mortgage is repaid . With straight term life , your loved ones will receive the difference of the face amount instead of the insurance company .
What is a 5 year term policy ? As the name suggest it is a policy that covers you for a specified amount for a specified premium for a period of 5 years . Typically the policy renews at a higher premium at the end of each 5 year period . You should check to see if the renewal is guaranteed and if so at what premium.If there is a possibility you will need permanent coverage you should check into what conversion options are available . If you are in the market for coverage , an independent agent / broker can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Assuming you mean price , the life insurance spreadsheets from the brokerage community are an excellent starting place to explore the life insurance company that best suits your financial profile , risk tolerance and economic goals . The spreadsheets are divided into two macro categories : Term Life Insurance and Permanent Life Insurance . Term Life Insurance is separated into guaranteed coverage periods 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years with health classifications for standard and better -LRB- 5 -RRB- as well as substandard ratings -LRB- 16 -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is divided into indemnification , income and inheritance planning goals -LRB- single life and survivorship policies -RRB- with health classifications for standard and better -LRB- 5 -RRB- as well as substandard ratings -LRB- 16 -RRB- . There is no one life insurance company that dominates any of these categories and subsets , but we monitor these areas diligently to keep consumers apprised of which life insurance companies rank the best
I do n't think you can state whole life is actually better than term life insurance or term life insurance is better than whole life . It just depends on the need by you , the client . There are many different product options when it comes to life insurance . There is the right product for practically every situation . The true use of whole life is when there is a level premium need for life insurance your `` whole life '' hence the name . However , whole life insurance has become the Swiss Army knife of life insurance . The riders and cash value can be used for critical illness , terminal illness , children 's college funds to retirement benefits . There are now lots of uses for whole life insurance . Term life insurance is meant more to cover a need for a fixed amount of time . There are term limits that vary from annually to 5 years , 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , 25 years , 30 years and even 35 years . You may also set a premium on a universal life plan that does n't build cash value other than to level your premiums as far as age 151 years old . The main thing to consider which type of life insurance you need is to first identify your need for life insurance . A wise man once shared , you should buy life insurance like you will die tomorrow and invest like you will live forever . Find an experienced independent broker to help you identify your needs and shop the market for the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
Term insurance comes from the term temporary , certain period or certain term . Term life insurance can be purchased for 5 years , 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , 25 years and 30 years . The length of time that you should have it depends on a case by case basis . You have to look at debt , expenses , the age of children , is there a college education to fund to determine what would best number of years to purchase the term insurance .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Where To File A Complaint Against A Health Insurance Company ?
All insurance companies are regulated on a state level . The first place to complain would be with the Department of Insurance of the state in which you reside . If your health coverage was purchased on either a state or federal insurance exchange -LRB- i.e. an `` Obamacare plan '' -RRB- , you may also file a complaint directly with the exchange . I would also suggest you speak with an independent insurance agent that represents the company to see if they can be of any assistance in resolving your concerns , or helping you change plans .
I suggest that if you have a complaint or grievance with your health insurer , that you contact your State Insurance Department to file a complaint . Your State Insurance Department will be able to handle it , or at least direct your type of complaint to the right authority . Of course , these sorts of complaint filings are long and drawn out and can take anywhere from 90 days to 3 years . So , you might be better off trying to work with your insurer first and exhaust all of those procedures before going to the authorities . That way , if the insurer is being malicious or faulty , you have more evidence to support your complaint . And depending on the type of grievance you have , all insurer 's have appeals and grievance processes to resolve issues and avoid any legal battle -LRB- or bad reputation backlash with consumers -RRB- . If you have an insurance agent , take it to them first and have them help you file any paperwork with the insurer . If you do n't have an agent , you can contact the insurer yourself . But , definitely exhaust those option first , then go to your State Insurance Department . If they are unhelpful , then you could always go to the federal Department of Health and Human Services and/or Consumer Protection Agency .
That 's a tough one to gauge , because not all health insurers are in every state or every county of the states they are in . And most of the data that is compiled is based off of a limited range of surveying . But , to me , you grade a health insurer 's ethics on several factors : the number of people they serve , the number of complaints ruled against them -LRB- not # of filed , because most complaints that are filed are dropped due to consumer 's misrepresentation -RRB- , their financial stability rating to pay claims , and the strictness of underwriting guidelines and # of denied applications -LRB- though you wo n't have to worry about that for the most part starting Jan 1 , 2014 -RRB- . Those are most important , but you secondly should look at their quality of customer service , their rates , number and quality of providers in their network , and type of plan it is -LRB- HMO , PPO , POS , FFS , ACO , etc. -RRB- . It all depends on how each individual defines ethical . Because you might find a company most ethical because they have the best doctors and hospitals in your area , pay their claims fast , have the best customer claims and billing service , and have the lowest complaints . But to another they 're unethical because their rates are 23 % higher , they do n't cover them across state lines , and they would n't insure their wife because she has diabetes . So , it 's really what you value as ethical . But , the best way to find the best company for you , is to find a good local health insurance broker that represents all insurers in your area and ask them those questions . Because , they will know better than anyone which company is best for you and the most ethical because they have dealt with all aspects with most of them on a regular basis . Plus , having a broker or agent on your side , fighting for you on any wrongdoing by the insurance company , will help your case and make your life a whole lot easier and save you time ... You wo n't just be a policy # in a computer , we help you put a face and story to their considerations ! And , even if after a chat with the broker and them recommending some plans , do your own research on those plans . Here are some good resources to look up plans and companies in your area , and how they stack up . Your State Insurance Department is a good start : WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK
Can you sue a health insurance company ? Absolutely , you can file suit against any person or entity . It 's just a question of money and time , as it can take both . Realizing this situation , most states have a remedy that you should try first . The Office of the Insurance Commissioner . You can file a complaint with the OIC and they will take it up if it 's worthy and go to bat for you . Always approach a problem with the least expensive solutions first .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
I suppose if that were to happen in 2014 you would contact your department of insurance and file a complaint . The ACA does not allow people to be denied health insurance coverage . it would be very unique and unusual for an insurance company to violate such a clear and well publisised law . But , if you happen to find yourself in that situation , I guess my advise is to file a complaint . ... Or maybe call the company and ask if that just landed in the USA and do n't understand the new rules !
Medicare CTM stands for Medicare Complaints Tracking Module . It was developed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- as a repository for complaints made about Medicare Part C and Medicare Part D. CTM was developed to capture , track and resolve complaints against Part C and Part D Medicare .
Great question ! When evaluating an insurance company , here are some things to look for : First , their financial stability - Standard and Poors , and AM Best are companies that rate the financial soundness of companies . Look for anything in the `` a '' range as being very financially stable , and capable of paying your claim . Look at the complaints filed against the company - do they have a pattern of issues paying claims , or denying them ? Lastly , are the applications and brochures clearly worded ? Do they make sense to you ? Are the agents of good quality ? Once you get comfortable with these questions , then look at their prices , coverage , and policies . If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Complaints regarding any type of insurance in TN need to be filed the TN Department of Consumer Insurance Services . You could contact them by phone at 615-741-2218 . They will listen to your complaint , but ultimately will direct you to their special online form found on the state 's website.You can bypassthetedious process of drillingdown through the state 's websiteand find theonline form to complete at the following link : - WEBSITELINK
The State Departments of Insurance -LRB- DOI -RRB- regulate and oversee long-term care insurance sold and administered in each state . The General Accounting Office of the federal government -LRB- GAO -RRB- works in concert with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- to monitor the activities of the State DOI , and audit their work as it relates to payment of claims by individual insurance carriers , rate changes and approvals , and sales practices . In 2008 , the GAO released a report `` State Oversight of Rate Setting and Claims Settlement Practices '' involving 10 sample states on the topicand reported the following : `` Regulators in the 10 states GAO reviewed oversee claims settlement practices by monitoring consumer complaints and conducting examinations in an effort to ensure that companies are complying with standards . Claims settlement standards in these states largely focus on timely investigation and payment of claims and prompt communication with consumers , but the standards adopted and how states define timeliness vary notably across the states . Regulators told GAO that reviewing consumer complaints is one of the primary methods for monitoring companies compliance with state standards . In addition to monitoring complaints , these regulators also said that they use examinations of company practices to identify any violations in standards that may require further action . Finally , state regulators in 6 of the 10 states in GAOs review reported that their states are considering additional protections related to claims settlement . For example , regulators in several states said that their states were considering an independent review process for consumers appealing claims denials . Such an addition may be useful as some regulators said that they lack authority to resolve complaints where , for example , the company and consumer disagree on a factual matter , such as a consumers eligibility for benefits . '' Each state has a DOI website which includes a subsection on long-term care insurance sold in that state . Their Internet addresses are usually something like www.insurance . -LSB- abbreviation of state , like ` AZ ' -RSB- . gov.They can also be googled '' -LSB- Name of state -RSB- State Department of Insurance '' .
Yes you can , all you need to do is contact the state department of insurance -LRB- also known as the insurance commissioners office -RRB- . If you are an IL resident , you can file your complain with the IL department of insurance . If you are not an IL resident , you would generally file the complaint with your state 's department of insurance . If this is insurance you own , then the insurer is permitted to do business in your state and is bound by your state 's insurance laws , and your states department of insurance will help inforce the state 's laws .
Great question ! Are you unhappy with the policy , something the company did or did n't do , or the agent ? If it is the policy , you may be able to get the coverage or price adjusted . If it has to do with a claim , the company will have an appeal process that you can file . If it is the agent , please discuss it with either them , or their boss first , and see if you can resolve the issue . Most times , they will do whatever is necessary to resolve the problem.If the agent or the company were dishonest or misleading , your state will have a department of insurance where you can lodge your complaint . Thanks for asking !
If you have Comprehensive Physical Damage coverage on your car , then that will include coverage for vandalism . Your Insurance Claim Professional my need to have a copy of a police report wich you would have filed with your local department . After you have filed the complaint and opened your claim with your Insurance Professional , it would be a good idea to obtain a repair estimate that claims can have as well . The more preparation the faster the settlement .
Usually the duration allowed for a company to pay a claim is set by each state 's office of the insurance commissioner or a similar named branch of government . An insurance company must have an established process they go through for claims payment . They can not make it up as they go . When the person handling the claim for the insured submits the necessary requirements , payment should be forthcoming . The claim check will also contain interest earned on the death benefit from the date the death occurred to the date the check was issued . If ever in a situation where you feel an insurance carrier is purposely slowing down a claim , contact your state department of insurance and file a complaint . This will greatly improve the speed of a carrier most of the time .
Objectively , there is no one best life insurance company in the USA , although some people certainly have personal opinions about which life insurance companies they like best . There are four main rating agencies that people consult to review the financial information of life insurance companies , and to see what they are rated . These rating agencies are AM Best , Standard and Poor 's , Moody 's , and Fitch . Some also look at Weiss and others . Looking at a database of complaints against the company can also influence what someone considers to be the best life insurance company in the USA .
Under the new Affordable Care Act , you can not be declined for health insurance for any pre-existing condition or other health-related illness . In short , individual health insurance plans are guaranteed-issue in today 's marketplace . If your application was rejected , there may have been information in error and it needs to be re-submitted - your insurance agent/broker should be able to look into this for you . I would suggest contacting your insurance agent or the carrier directly to find out why you were declined for coverage before filing any complaints or other actions . It may end up being something as a simple error that is easily correctable .
Your states insurance department would be the regulator in regards to any insurance product other tan Medicare Advantage . While policies are pretty standardized it is your state that would provide regulation and enforcement of insurance companies who offer home insurance . If you have an issue with a company regarding claims contact your state department of insurance to file a complaint .
All insurance companies are regulated on a state level . The first place to complain would be with the Department of Insurance of the state in which you reside . If your health coverage was purchased on either a state or federal insurance exchange -LRB- i.e. an `` Obamacare plan '' -RRB- , you may also file a complaint directly with the exchange . I would also suggest you speak with an independent insurance agent that represents the company to see if they can be of any assistance in resolving your concerns , or helping you change plans .
That is a great question ! One I 'm sorry that you have to ask ... I 'm sorry for your loss . Each Stat 's Department of Insurance will have in its codes the specified time limits for filing claims , beginning the processing , and for making the payments . You may want to look there for your answer . The fact that your loved one passed so soon after purchasing the policy is always a red flag for the insurer , their first assumption is that there was a desperate health issue that led to the purchasing of the policy , and perhaps some dishonesty in the application answers . That is certainly not always the case , but that is how they treat it . They will ask for Doctor 's statements , coroner 's or autopsy reports , police reports , whatever documentation they need to determine if the timing was coincidental , or expected . Once they 've received all of the documentation , the process moves pretty quickly . I 'd expect the process to take between 6 weeks and 90 days , maybe longer , maybe sooner , depending upon how quickly everything is received . In any case , you will receive a payment for some amount . It will either be for face value of the policy , if they find in your favor , or for what had been paid in premiums over the length of time the policy had been issued , and some amount of interest , if they do n't . Should the latter be the case , you do have the right to appeal , but you 'll need a good lawyer and some money to outlast the insurer 's lawyer and overturn the decision . If you feel that you 've been wronged by them , you have the right also to file a complaint with the State . If you do so , be nice to your agent , because unless they advised you to misrepresent the truth , or have you apply fr something that was n't appropriate , I can guarantee you they had no part in the decision that was made by the company , In fact , they will have been asked for a statement also , and would have had to tell their impression of your loved one 's health . I 'm sorry for your loss , and I hope everything works out for you . Thank you for asking !
Term life insurance is pretty much the same , no matter which company from which you buy it . Some things that could make one policy better than another are : 1 -RRB- The premiums are guaranteed not to go up for the entire term . 2 -RRB- The policy is convertible to a variety of permanent products , to the end of the term or past age 65 , whichever comes first . 3 -RRB- The policy is renewable . Companies are mainly rated by agencies such as AM Best , S&P , Moody 's , and Fitch . You can also look up complaints against a life insurance company , their customer service satisfaction , and other factors to help in your decision .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Do You Cancel A Universal Life Insurance Policy ?
Universal Life Insurance , like any `` permanent '' insurance policy , needs to be cancelled through the carrier that it is written with . If you have an agent , you can contact him/her and ask for the SURRENDER forms . By requesting and submitting a completed form , the issuing company will refund your Cash Surrender Value at the time of the request and send them to you via check or EFT . Before cancelling ANY permanent policy , carefully consider your insurability , cash flow , and benefit need , as you may not be able to replace a terminated policy .
Canceling existing life insurance is not a step to be taken lightly . If the beneficiaries no longer need the protection then cancelling the policy might be appropriate . Contact the agent or company representative and let them know what you desire . In California you might have difficulty surrendering a policy because of community property laws . The company will walk you through the process .
Many people `` cancel '' their policies by simply stopping paying the premium . That is not a bad way to drop a term policy , but with universal life , you should cancel your policy through the carrier . You may be able to salvage some of the cash value , or even use it to continue your policy until you can afford paying premiums again . It is not your most cost effective choice to just let UL slip away .
You must cancel the policy through the company which issued it . Because your needs may have changed , review your situation with a competent agent . Find out if it is really in YOUR best interest to cancel , surrender for cash , or replace the policy with a newer one . There may be tax advantages to replacing the old policy with a newer universal life policy .
Universal life policies are somewhat tricky . What happens when you cancel a universal life policy depends on when you cancel the policy . In the beginning years of a UL it has no cash value accumulated , so if you cancel during that stage nothing happens other than the policy terminates . You get no money back . In the mid range years of the policy it will likely have some cash value , so if you cancel it during that period you may receive the cash value . In the later years of a UL , unless you have kept pace with the increasing `` cost of insurance '' , -LRB- in other words paid increasingly higher premiums -RRB- , the cash value that has accumulated may be reduced by they increasing cost of insurance until there is no more cash value remaining . At that point the policy may terminate . So if you cancel the policy while it has cash value you will receive the cash value . If there is no cash value when you cancel the policy it will simply terminate .
Yes , you can cancel life insurance at any time . With Term insurance there is no penalty for cancelling at any time , except for losing the coverage . With Whole or Universal Life , there is a surrender charge in the first years of the policy that will be deducted from any cash value you might have gotten back . If there is no cash value , you simply lose the policy . Keep in mind that , unless you paid extra at the start , the first years of the policy do not generally accumulate cash value as quickly as later . Talk over cancellation of your Whole or Universal Life with an agent who can explain the consequences and options for keeping it in some form . You may find that cancelling is not want to do , after all . Or you may have affirmation that you are doing the right thing .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Your Life Insurance policy will have the specifics of the `` Grace Period '' that provides and cushion for you when you miss a payment . Life Insurance companies usually want youto keep you policy . Their Grace Period is usually 30 to 60 days depending on the policy and the company . The type of policy will make a difference as well . A Term Life Insurance policy does not have any `` Cash Value '' or a side account that can grow at an interest rate like a savings account and cover the missed premium . This `` Cash Value '' is a feature of a Universal Life policy . The Term Life policy would be in danger of lapsing much quicker and you are probably going to cancelled quicker . A Universal Life policy with cash value is going to use the saving portion to pay the premium . The Universal Life will lapse once the cash value is depleted and the grace period expires . You can call your agent or Life Insurance company and work out options on the Universal Life policy such as lower the `` Face Amount '' or amount of death benefit to help you make the policy last longer . `` Whole Life Insurance '' will have a grace period as well . Coverage options beyond the grace period become more complicated . This Whole Life policy also has a `` Cash Value '' or savings portion as well . You will be subject to the policy 's `` Non Forfeiture Options '' within the policy . These options are different for each policy . You will have to check your policy . Usually , there are 3 options : Return of the cash value to you minus any loans you took out , you can change to a lower amount of insurance that is `` Paid Up '' or you do not have to pay premiums for the amount of death benefit , or you can change to a `` Term Life Insurance '' policy for a specific period of time then the insurance stops .
Life insurance policies that are owned by you and paid by you can be cancelled by you at anytime . The exception is mentioned above with a court order or contractual obligation . A term life insurance policy is as easy as a phone call and it will be cancelled . Most insurance carriers will require your request in writing . A cash value life insurance policy such as a whole life or universal life that has cash value may have some tax consequences to cancelling coverage . When you cancel a policy with cash value , the difference will be returned to you and you will be responsible for paying the taxes on the cash value growth at your current income level . if this is the case , be sure and have a statement to look at prior to making the cancellation .
You have significant power to walk away from any insurer . Most states operate with regulations regarding how a cancellation in mid term is treated . Before you leap to canceling your Progressive policy , check with the Insurance department in your state . They will know whether there is a requirement to pro rate the premium or not . Pro rated cancellations are the norm and this is how that works . If you cancel an annual policy for which you paid the whole premium and you cancel at exactly six months , then the company will return to you 50 % of the premium . So , just make sure what the cancellation requirements are in your state .
Yes , you can cancel life insurance at any time , but should give it some thought before doing so . Term Life Insurance has no cash value or surrender charges , so cancelling it is as easy as just stopping payments . However , if you do want a new Term policy in the future , rates will be most likely be higher due to your being older , and you may have had a change in health that prevents you from getting a new policy . You might want to look into converting part of your Term policy to Permanent while that window of opportunity is open . Cancelling Whole Life or Universal Life that has built up some cash value presents even more decisions . Is your policy paid up , or could it be , so that you do not owe anything else on it ? If you do take out the cash value , are you going to roll it over into something else ? Do you no longer have a need for Life Insurance at all ? Money can be tight and Life Insurance may seem to be an expendable item in the budget . But if a tragedy would occur , money would become a lot tighter . Sit down and talk to an agent before making your decision and you might be pleasantly surprised at the options you have .
Certainly , but you do not want this situation as most policies contain a ` other insurance ' clause in them and this could create problems you do not need in the event of a loss/claim occurringin the ` overlap ' period . Follow the cancellation procedures outlined in the policy you desire to cancel and have no gap between the cancelled policy and the replacement policy . DO NOT RELY ON A NEW BROKER OR AGENT TO CANCEL YOUR EXISTING POLICY WITHOUT GETTING DOCUMENTATION IN WRITING THEY ARE SENDING APPROPRIATE CANCELLATION DOCUMENTS AND EVIDENCE TO YOUR CURRENT CARRIER . Remember , the contract is between you and your current carrier and only you -LRB- the named insured -RRB- can request cancellation of your policy . Also be aware that ` auto pay ' or ` EFT ' payment modes on an existing policy may not be terminated immediately and your account may be ` swept ' for a premium due within the next 21 to 30 days . Make sure your auto pay or EFT plan is terminated asap -LRB- and get evidence -RRB- when your policy is cancelled .
It is OK to cancel life insurance . If you have a permanent policy , there may be a surrender charge applied during the first years of the policy , which will reduce the amount of cash value that you get . However , you will not have to pay extra money to cancel your policy , whether it is Term , Whole or Universal Life . Sometimes there are other options than cancelling a policy , that can help you hold onto the death benefit while still lowering your premium . But if you do decide to cancel , be sure your new policy is approved and in effect before you drop the old one .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
Traditioanlly , If you canceled a permanent life insurance policy , the carrier would need you to either sign paperwork acknowledging you want to terminate the coverage or they record the phone call -LRB- think of the latter as like a voice signature -RRB- . If there is cash value inside a permanent life policy and the policy is canceled , you are cashing it out -LRB- less any surrender charges or outstanding loans against the policy , if applicable -RRB- . Did he receive a check for any cash value or did the carrier indicate they were sending monies ? How old was the policy and what age was he when he took it out ? If all routes to put the old policy back in force are exhausted , then you may want to look at an alternative course of action . An option to consider to secure new coverage is to use the monies received from the cashed out whole life policy to put towards the premiums for a new policy to substantially reduce the premiums that would be needed for the coverage . If he is much older , then you may want to consider a Guaranteed Universal Life policy instead of a whole life policy . Guaranteed universal life minimizes the cash value buildup to minimize the dollar spent per $ 1,000 of coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
Since you have had the policy since 2011 you are well beyond the incontestability period . It must be one of the following : You purchase term insurance and the term has run out . -LRB- possible but unlikely since you should have a renewal option -RRB- . You purchased a Universal Life policy and it was underfunded -LRB- this may be the most likely reason -RRB- . A Universal life policy has flexible premiums and some agents , in order to make a sale , have set the premium too low without telling the client . Most agents are honest , but unfortunately every industry has bad apples . If you do not pay enough into a Universal Life Policy , the policy will cancel out . The only other thing it could be is failure to pay the premium within the grace period , usually 30 days . I agree with Rich , you need to take all of the information to a good professional independent life insurance agent and have him review what went on in your case . A life insurance company can not cancel you for no reason .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For A Knee Replacement ?
Medicare does cover joint replacement if the need to replace the joint is considered medically necessary . Joint replacement includes shoulder , hip , knee and other body joints . Make sure you use a medical provider that accepts assignment . Some replacement joint devices are considered a `` premium '' device . You may be responsible for paying the difference in a basic device and an upgrade . Your provider can advise .
Knee replacement surgery is normally a Medicare covered expense assuming the surgery is considered medically necessary and you are a good candidate for joint replacement . The cost of knee replacement is usually around $ 45,000 but the Medicare allowance is in the $ 11,000 range . If you have a good Medigap plan your share will be significantly less .
Yes . Of course an appropriate diagnosis and recommendation for treatment will have to be made and you will want to exhaust any other less intrusive forms of treatment before you or your health insurance carrier should want to be replacing your original parts . But knee replacements , when medically necessary , are routinely covered services subject to whatever deductible , coinsurance and/or copayments are in your health insurance policy . The state of the art in replacement surgeries for knees and hips have advanced rapidlyand are far less traumatic than they were just a few years ago . I have a friend who recently had hip socket replacement surgery done on an outpatient basis who went in for the procedure early in the morning and walked out using a cane by mid-afternoon .
The cost of complete knee replacement is about $ 45,000 . The Medicare allowance is in the $ 11,000 range . A partial knee replacement is about half that amount . As Rick indicated , a good Medigap plan could reduce your out of pocket cost to $ 0 if you had Medicare supplement plan F . A little more with a different plan .
Medicare will pay for hip replacements , if medically necessary . Ca n't say which is # 1 and which is # 2 , but hip and knee replacements and cataracts are the the first things people get when they become eligible for Medicare . If you are anticipating a hip replacement , sign on for for original Medicare and a Medicare supplement . If you go the Advantage route you will pay $ 2000 - $ 3000 OOP .
Medicare does cover joint replacement if the need to replace the joint is considered medically necessary . Joint replacement includes shoulder , hip , knee and other body joints . Make sure you use a medical provider that accepts assignment . Some replacement joint devices are considered a `` premium '' device . You may be responsible for paying the difference in a basic device and an upgrade . Your provider can advise .
Yes , Medicare will pay for knee replacement surgeries . Medicare also pays for hip replacements . This type of surgery is one of the larger expenditures by Medicare and provided pain relief and increased mobility to hundreds of thousands of seniors -LRB- and younger persons -RRB- over the years since knee replacement were invented .
Unfortunately , knee walkers are not normally paid for by Medicare . If you can get a doctor 's prescription saying that crutches or canes will not provide the support needed , it may be possible for Medicare Part B to cover a knee walker . However , providers of knee walkers generally state that Medicare does not cover this type of walker at this point in time , and under most circumstances .
Medicare is very comprehensive health coverage for those that qualify . Medicare will cover a Total Knee Replacement as long as the Physician , Hospital , and any other healthcare providers are deemed as providers . You can check each provider out on the Medicare.gov website . Medicare Part A would cover the hospital expenses and if a Skilled Nursing Facility is needed for rehabilitation . You will have a deductible if you only have Medicare A and B . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of the out of pocket costs . Medicare Part B would cover the Physician charges and any outpatient services required . You have an annual deductible and 20 % coinsurance . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of these our to pocket cost . Medicare Advantage plans have daily charges and copays that vary for every plan . You should check with the plan to confirm that the providers are in their network and determine what your costs might be .
Medicare will pay for Euflexxa injections for the knee only . As with all treatments , it must be determined to be medically necessary to be covered by Medicare . Evidence of osteoarthritis of the knee is required by X-ray in order for Medicare to cover hyaluronan injections , of which Euflexxa is one .
Yes , Medicare will pay for Synvisc-One injections if for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee . The osteoarthritis must be verified by X-Ray and of course , the one giving the injection must be Medicare approved . It can only be given once every 6 months and only osteoarthritis of the knee is approved by Medicare for Synvisc , which is a hyalauronan drug .
Yes Medicare does pay for Medically necessary knee replacement . If all you have is original Medicare you will be responsible for your Part A Hospital deductible and possibly some Part B Medical expenses . If you must do rehab in a nursing facility , the first 20 days will be paid at 100 % . Some rehab done at home may also be paid for .
Medicare will cover Euflexxa and otherHyaluronan injections for osteoarthritis of the knee , only . The injectable drugs covered are Euflexxa , Hyalgan , Synvisc , Supartz , Orthovisc , and Synvisc One . The osteoarthritis of the knee must be proven by x-ray and no more than one injection will be paid for in every 6 months .
If you do have a pre-existing condition , it 's possible that that particular condition would be excluded . For example , if you have had several knee surgeries , it 's most likely that they 'd exclude your knee . Do n't forget that if you get denied for DI due to a pre-exisiting condition , you could still possibly receive critical illness insurance .
I am correcting my original answer due to a message I received from a helpful reader : Florida BC/BS and Oklahoma Health Care Authority have listed this drug as well as the other hyaluronic acid injections as non-covered based on the May 2013 AAOS release of Treatment of Osteoarthritic of the Knee : Evidence Based Guidance which included information that this treatment for OA of the knee is no longer recommended .
I believe Medicare can help pay for a lift chair , if there 's a medical necessity -LRB- for those with severe hip or knee arthritis , or a neuromuscular disease , and can not get up from a seated position to stand on their own -RRB- , as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- under your Medicare Part B insurance . Part B would pay 80 % of the cost and you would be responsible for the remaining 20 % . I 'd recommend calling Medicare to get more specific input .
Knee walkers can be a covered expense under Medicare if your doctor approves the equipment . As with any DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- purchase you should use a Medicare approved supplier that accepts Medicare assignment . Providers that do not accept assignment can balance bill you which will substantially increase your OOP expenses .
Medicare Part B covers some DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including wheelchairs , walkers , hospital beds and lift chairs . The need for a mobility assist device must be documented by your doctor and a prescription must be written . You must be diagnosed with some form of muscular or joint disorder of the knees or hips . The Medicare allowance usually is limited to $ 300 .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
Yes , Medicare does cover knee and hip replacement surgeries . These are very popular surgeries and getting more common all the time . However , the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- is reported to be considering deep cuts in the reimbursements paid to orthopedic doctors for performing this type of operation . It remains to be seen if that comes to pass .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Did Medicare Part D Become Effective ?
January 1,2006 was the effective date for Medicare Part D. Coverage can be obtained by enrolling in a PDP -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- or a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- MAPD -RRB- that covers medical/hospital/prescription drugs in one plan . I recommend contacting an independent agent who specializes in Medicare plans to help determine the best plan for your specific needs ...
Medicare Part D became effective on January 1 , 2006 . It is available to persons enrolled in Medicare Part A and B for prescription drug payment assistance , by joining a PDP -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . Or you can join a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- MA -RRB- that covers services and drugs in one plan .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If youdefinehaving insurance coverage for your prescription drugs when you are age 65 + as `` good '' when prior to the Bush administration 's implementation of this plan seniors on traditional Medicare did n't , then Medicare Part D is definitely a good thing . In fact , some would argue that Medicare Part D , with its pesky reliance on private insurance options and marketplace competition , is the only part of Medicare that has delivered on it 's promises of expanding coverage for a high utilization population segment and managed to come in under initial cost projections . Medicare Part D is just another level of Medicare coverage specifically designed to address prescription drug coverage . As with Medicare supplement plans , different insurance carriers offer Medicare Part D plans with different levels of coverage and price points for consumers to select from during their initial eligibility period and subsequent open enrollment renewal years . This means that the consumer is obliged to shop around because not all Medicare Part D plans are created equal , far from it . Most consumers would be well served to use the services of an insurance broker who is knowledgeable in the various Medicare Part D plans available in their marketplace .
Medicare Part D , otherwise known as the Medicare prescription drug benefit , is a government subsidized program that was part of the 2003 Medicare Modernization Act . The MMA did n't go into effect however until 2006 . Medicare Part D is available to Individuals as long as they are signed up for Part A and Part B . Once in force there are two plans to choose from depending on whether there insurance is private or public . As a rule of thumb , not all medications are covered under Medicare Part D . In addition , the program delivers a strong incentive to choose generic drugs over name brand drugs . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978 ... I would love to hear from you .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
You can only change your Medicare Part D prescription drug plan during the annual enrollment period - October 15th to December 7th of each year . If/When you change your part D plan to another part D plan , the effective date becomes January 1 of the following year . To secure a new part D plan outside of the annual enrollment period , you will need a special enrollment period , have Medicare and Medicaid , or be eligible for medicaid and/or a low income subsidy . You can look on medicare.gov to see more information regarding changing part D coverage .
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In order to qualfify for Part D you must be enrolled in Part A and Part B. Therefore if you have a medicare card showing when you were approved for Medicare Part A and Part B this card is your authorization to apply for Part D. I hope you did not fail to enroll in Part D at your initial enrollment period because there is penalty for late enrollment
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . When enrolling under a special enrollment period , the effective date would be the 1st of the following month after you apply . The effective date of coverage when applying during the general enrollment period will be July 1 of the year you apply . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Yes , however , the best time to sign up for Part B is during your initial enrollment period when you turn 65 . If you choose not to enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible , you can enroll during the General Enrollment Period - January 1st to March 31st of each year . When you do this , the effective date will be July 1st . You may be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you do n't sign up when you 're first eligible : an additional 10 % is added to your premium for every year you did not have the coverage . You can avoid this penalty if you qualify for a special enrollment period - the most common way this happens is coming off of a group plan . A special enrollment period is an 8-month window to enroll in Part B without the penalty being tacked on to the premium . If you enroll during this 8-month window , the effective date would become the first day of the following month .
The answer to your question will vary somewhat depending upon where you are getting your health insurance . Are you a new employee anticipating your employer based coverage ? Or , are you a person looking for a personal , individual major medical insurance plan ? After January 1 , 2014 in the employer based setting and under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act , once you are hired as a full-time eligible employee or your hours are increased to full-time status , then the employer can not have a waiting period that exceeds 90 calendar days from the date you become eligible . So , an employer can have a waiting period of anywhere from `` date of hire '' to the 90 calendar days from date of hire . For administrative and payroll keeping purposes I am finding most employers are opting for a policy on a new hire becoming eligible for coverage on the `` first day of the month following 60-days '' . In the individual health insurance world we do have to keep the new open enrollment periods in mind and how failure to enroll during this annual election period can impact a person 's eligibility for health insurance coverage between open enrollment times . In other words , if you `` just did n't get around to it '' and you 've had no change of life status event since open enrollment closed then you ca n't take out a major medical health insurance policy until the next open enrollment period for a 1st of the year start date at best . -LRB- If you qualify you can take out a Short Term Medical policy to carry you through until then -RRB- Assuming yours is a normal individual major medical enrollment then the following rules of thumb apply to when your effective date of coverage is supposed to be ; 1 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted on or before the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the next month . For example , an enrollment submitted on December 10th would be for an effective date of January 1st . 2 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted after the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the following month . For example , an application is submitted on December 20th would be for an effective date of February 1st . Open enrollment season for 2015 begins on November 15th , 2014 and runs through February 15th , 2015 .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B late , but there may be penalties . If you do not enroll in Medicare Part B when you first become eligible , you can enroll during the open enrollment period from January 1 and March 31 each year . If you sign up during this period , your plan will become effective July 1 . You will be charged an additional 10 % on your premium for every 12 months you went without coverage . However , if you did n't enroll because you were covered by a different insurance plan , you can sign up during the eight months following the end of that plan without a penalty .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Medicare supplement plans and Medicare Advantage plans were developed for a very simple reason . Medicare does not provide 100 % coverage for health care services and does not cover some services at all . Medicare is a creature of the early 1960 's and people over age 65 at that time on average only had several more years of life expectancyplus there was a lot less that the health care system could do for peopleback then . These factors have changed significantly 50 years later with seniors living longer , more active lives and with a multitude of medical and pharmaceutical treatments available to them . If you are becoming eligible for Medicare today , there is a very good chance that over the remainder of your life you will have multiple opportunities to utilize services under Medicare for which you will have to share financial responsibility -LRB- e.g. - hospitalizations -RRB- and it is almost impossible to become a senior citizen in America these days and not be on one or more prescription medications -LRB- prescription coverage for seniors on Medicare did n't even really exist until Medicare Part D was created by the Bush Administration in 2003 -RRB- . It is to protect yourself against these out-of-pocket expenses that people purchase Medicare supplemental coverage that fills in most of the gaps in Medicare 's coverage .
No . Once you have enrolled in Medicare Part A and or B you are always on it unless you choose to cancel it for some reason . With Medicare Part D -LRB- your drug coverage -RRB- you are wise to review it every year between October 15th and December 7th because you plan can change even if you did n't do anything to change it . Also if you chose to go with Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- you need to meet with your agent every year between October 15th and December 7th to learn of your changes which take effect January 1st each year . But original Medicare Parts A & B stay basically the same year after year and you never have to reapply .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . Please note , when you enroll in Part B during the general enrollment period , your effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Happens When You Apply For Health Insurance ?
To add to what Barry said , the typical timeline is anywhere between 2-6 weeks before everything falls into place . The time is influenced by the current volume of applicants and if everything is complete on the application , and if the payment goes through etc. . The typical steps are : 1 . Application submission . 2 . Review for eligibility . 3 . Notice of approval and request for payment . 4 . Payment clears . 5 . Enrollment in to coverage . 6 . Issuance of ID card and coverage contract .
This a great question since everything has changed beginning January 1 , 2014 . Since all individual health insurance is guarantee issue an insurance carrier can not turn you down and therefore will not ask any medical questions . Once the application is complete carriers will review it to make sure it is complete and you have chosen a plan . At that point it is approved . No more medical questions , no more waiting for doctors to reply for more information .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
what happens to my life insurance when I retire ? If the life insurance is provided by your employer it will depend on what they offer . It might end immediately , it might carry on into retirement or you might be offered to carve out an individual policy from the group plan . There is n't a single answer as plans are different . If you `` own '' the policy what happens to your life insurance is what ever you want to have happen to it .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
Yes , high cholesterol DOES affect life insurance rates . It is important to disclose any and all health issues when applying for life insurance . Sometimes , you can get a slightly better rate if you disclose all issues on the application , rather than trying to hide something . In most cases , these health issues will turn up on physician reports and/or med exams and if you 're not honest up front , insurance companies will place you in a lower high-risk bracket that you did not apply for . It is important to remember that not all health issues are `` knock outs '' , especially if they happened some time ago .
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
There are several variables that will determine what happens to the Cash Value -LRB- CV -RRB- . First , as Jerry was saying , in the later years or life of the policy , the Cost of Insurance -LRB- COI -RRB- exceeds the premium you are currently paying -LRB- which hopefully has been level since you purchased it -RRB- . When this happens , the premium would need to increase to keep up with the cost however when there is CV , this is used to pay the difference . Ideally , the crediting rate on the excess funds is enough to provide you with growth even while paying the additional premium . When you take a withdrawal or loan , this effects the CV as well . With a loan , keeping this simple , the death proceeds will be reduced by how much the outstanding loan is . A withdrawal will generally drop the death benefit immediately . When there is enough crediting interest , even with loans and withdrawals , we have seen policies continue to grow . Jerry said it well , Life Insurance is an Asset for you to use . Last , if you have your policy designed with an Increasing Benefit , usually called `` option b '' , the CV will be included into the death benefit . This is one what to stay ahead of inflation especially when you are expected to live a long life .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Does Obamacare effect life insurance ? So far , no . But at some point Obamacare and all that it offers , has to be paid for . There is a serious effort in DC to find tax revenue sources and life insurance and annuities are both being eyed for future tax revenues to support the cost of healthcare . One thing when changes like this happen , and they do happen , what 's in force is usually grandfathered and kept exempt from the action . Usually something like this would apply to future purchases . Just another reason not to `` round to it . ''
What happens at a life insurance exam depends on your age , the life insurance company , and the face amount of the policy for which you are applying . If you are young and applying for a small policy , it is possible that all that is needed is answering of medical questions , or a urinalysis along with that . For most people that apply for a medically underwritten life insurance policy , a blood and urine sample are taken ; measurements , weight , blood pressure , pulse , etc are taken ; and health questions are covered . For middle aged to senior persons , a resting EKG may be added . For very large face amounts , the requirements may add include a treadmill EKG for older persons , or possibly a full exam by the applicant 's physician .
Only you can answer this question of Life Insurance being essential . For those of us who see the financial loss in families who lost a parent or spouse , Life Insurance relieves financial stress allowing you to take care of what is most important , your family . YES , I believe life insurance is essential . Life Insurance provides you or rather your beneficiary with monies otherwise would not be available . You need to look at what is important in your life , who depends on you , your family , perhaps your business and look at what will happen if you are not there `` tomorrow '' . What will happen financially and how would you relieve that financial stress .
Not normally . Your home insurance was designed to repair or replace your home if something covered happens to it . Usually , anything below ground is n't covered . Now , if your home is destroyed and the insurance company rebuilds your home , they will usually pay to hook your sewer up , but not to repair or replace the pipes . if you think about the things that can happen to a home , a sewer pipe really ca n't have those things happen to it . My big question here is : what the heck happened to your sewer pipes that you want covered ? Insurance is designed to repair damage that is sudden and accidental . There are n't many things you can do to a sewer pipe that are sudden and accidental . About the only thing I can think of is if someone working underground hits a sewer pipe and breaks it . In this case the company working there is responsible for any damage they may cause .
That is a very good question ! You are kind of between a rock and a hard place . If you contact them , and have a ` safe driver ' bonus , you could lose that , and with the subsequent rate increase , -LRB- if there is no first accident forgiveness plan -RRB- you might well exceed the expense of the repairs . On the other hand , if you do not know the person that she hit wo n't be the type that later claims back injuries or some such thing , and takes you to court -LRB- I 'd wonder about this if he or she documented and/or took pictures , and your wife did n't -RRB- , without the power of your insurance company behind you , you could be in a bigger mess . Another consideration is your deductible - if it 's more than $ 700 , you would end up paying that much anyway , and run the risk of a rate increase . If coming up with $ 700 is an issue , and you have a low deductible , then having the insurance company pay may be an option . Perhaps a good thing to do might be to contact your agent , and tell them you and your wife were talking about what would happen if one of you were to have an accident , and were not sure what would happen if so , and have them explain it to you . If it sounds good , then do it , if it sounds bad , then consider your risks of handling it out of pocket . Personally , I 'd probably call them , and explain it exactly as it happened , and trust my agent to what is best for me . I hope it works out for you , good luck , and thank you for asking !
I ca n't think of a situation where it would n't be required . Your mortgage company has just lent you a bunch of money to buy a home . They need to be sure that , if something happens to the home , it will be restored to what it was before anything happened . They 're just protecting their investment . The bigger question is `` why would n't you want to insure your home ? '' . You just made a big commitment and have a lot of money on the line . If something happened to your home , what would you do ? Yes , premiums for homeowners insurance are high , but not as high as the repairs you 'd have to pay for if you did n't have insurance . Plus , it not only protects the house , but everything in the house . Most people do n't think they have a lot of money tied up in their `` things '' , but they 'd be astonished to find out what it would cost to replace it all .
You ask if `` renters insurance cover break ins '' . I am going to assume you are asking : What happens if the apartment building burns down ? A thief broke into your apartment ? What if a guest slips and injures themselves in your kitchen ? What happens if the apartment suffers water damage ? What about all my clothing , furniture , televsions , computer , iPod , musical or sporting equipment , and my wife 's jewelry ? The answer is yes , Reneters insurance covers all the above . Smart investment .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is VA Life Insurance Taxable ?
VA Life Insurance is not taxable , as long as the beneficiary of the policy is not the `` estate '' . When life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , they are taxable , whether issued by the Veterans Administration or from a private source . But life insurance proceeds left to a person or group do not generally incur income tax . VA Life Insurance is also subject to estate tax if the amount of the death benefit , added to the value of the estate , exceeds the exempted amount . Only the excess is taxed with estate taxes , and the federal exemption is 5.25 million this year . Some states have state estate -LRB- inheritance -RRB- taxes and some do n't .
VA Life Insurance is not taxable , as long as the beneficiary of the policy is not the `` estate '' . When life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , they are taxable , whether issued by the Veterans Administration or from a private source . But life insurance proceeds left to a person or group do not generally incur income tax . VA Life Insurance is also subject to estate tax if the amount of the death benefit , added to the value of the estate , exceeds the exempted amount . Only the excess is taxed with estate taxes , and the federal exemption is 5.25 million this year . Some states have state estate -LRB- inheritance -RRB- taxes and some do n't .
Yes , Medicare can be secondary to VA. . The two do not work together ; the VA only covers services provided at VA facilities and Medicare does not cover care provided at VA facilities . But if the VA approves care outside their providers , Medicare might cover it . As far as drug coverage goes , VA drug coverage does not have a premium and covers most or more than the drugs covered for Medicare Part D so there may not be a need for both plans if the VA is your primary provider .
Yes , you can have VA and Medicare . However , in order to use health care benefits provided by the VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- , you must receive your health care at a VA facility . Medicare does not cover services provided by a VA facility . Medicare benefits can be a good supplement to VA benefits though , covering what the VA does not cover .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- benefits . But in order to use VA benefits , you must get care at a VA facility . And Medicare does not cover services provided by a VA facility . So they are not altogether compatible . But VA benefits can be a good supplement for what Medicare does not cover , such as prescription drugs .
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
The VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- requires that you receive care at their facilities and with their providers in order to receive VA benefits . Thus , the VA does not accept Medicare , as Medicare only works with Medicare approved facilities and providers . Many veterans use Medicare for their major medical expenses but use VA benefits to fill in the gaps . However , the VA drug plan covers more than Medicare Part D covers .
I would advise enrolling in both Medicare Part A and B even though you get your medical care through the VA. . If you want to get care outside of the VA you will need to have Medicare A & B. Depending on what is going on with your health it may be important to get medical care from a doctor or hospital that is not part of the VA system . I have clients that have a Medicare Supplement with me so they can utilize doctors and hospitals outside of the VA but they still use VA doctors for some of their health care needs .
Treatment at VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- facilities can be a crapshoot . I hear good stories and bad so the answer is , it depends . If the VA facilities near you are well staffed and not overcrowded , you might `` get by '' with VA alone . Medicare Part A and B give you more options besides just VA facilities . Some VA pharmacies may not have the medications you need in stock and it may take weeks to receive your meds . Having Medicare Part D -LRB- drug plan -RRB- allows you to purchase your Rx via mail order or at a local pharmacy . Medicare Part A and B , along with a good Medicare supplement plan expands your options and may provide shorter wait times for care .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA Benefits . One plan will be a secondary payer . Since the Veterans Administration benefits must be used at VA facilities , usually Medicare is secondary to the VA insurance . However , sometimes VA drug benefits are a good supplemental plan to Medicare , and thus becomes the secondary payer .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Variable annuities -LRB- VA -RRB- s are a security under FINRA and an insurance product under the department of insurance . VAs have two account types : the general interest rate account and the separate sub account that uses equity and bond investments . VAs have internal charges that are paid from the contributions of the policy owner and any crediting or debiting of the accounts are applied , i.e. you can lose make or lose money .
In order to get VA Life insurance , someone must meet one these conditions : 1 -RRB- Have converted their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days after separating from the Service . This can be extended one year with a statement of good health . 2 -RRB- Have been given a VA rating for a new service related disability incurred in the past two years . This qualifies them for S-DVI -LRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Qualified for VMLI -LRB- Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance -RRB- by virtue of being a disabled veteran who was able to get an SAH grant .
To be fair to Suze , she has online piece called The Truth About Annuities , that outlines her position on annuities and which also addresses variable annuities -LRB- VA -RRB- . While she appears to question the VA expense loads a legitimate gripe as in all investment , she seems to down play the tax deferral feature . Read her piece online to determine her position .
A veteran needs Long Term Care Insurance if he/she does not want to utilize long term health care provided by the Veterans Administration . This may be due to location or some other bias the veteran has about receiving VA medical care . Or a veteran might want Long Term Care Insurance in case he/she can not qualify for full benefits or full compensation for care offered by the VA. .
You can opt out of Part B by sending a letter to Social security asking that your Part B coverage be cancelled . I hope you have carefully weighed that decision because in order for you to have DRUG coverage yuo have to have Part A AND Part B . If you do not have Part B you can not have any coverage for Outpatient Services - doctors , lab , xrays , etc - unless you have VA coverage and then what happens if you need treatment at a non-VA facility . You need to weigh this question very thoroughly because yuou could be cutting your own throat
You asked a very detailed and complicated question . Your first cost is , if you are a service connected veteran , was the days and months you spent in that `` foxhole '' or some distant country that separated you from your family and friends . However , you do not have to be `` service connected '' in order to obtain treatment by the VA. . You can go through a `` annual means '' testing at VA where you are required to provide `` financial details '' including if you do have health insurance . Then you can also be classified as a `` hardship case '' by disclosing financial information and the type of treatment you need . Generally your copays are $ 8 for medication ; outpatient copays are $ 15 for non = specialist and $ 50 for specialist . If you have to be admitted , your copay is the current year Medicare deductible which was $ 840 in 2003 and has been indexing each year and will be $ 2016 in 2014
Why would you want to `` pitch '' a Variable Annuity ? A VA is a useful product for those individuals who want to have upside performance , a basic death benefit , and other living benefits such as Guaranteed Minimum Income Benefits . But PRODUCT , and that includes any of the insurance based products , should be part of an overall consulting relationship where the client understand the risks and rewards of that product . The job of the financial advisor when selling a client a VA is to fact find , determine a client 's risk tolerance , and then provide choices commensurate with a client 's goals . If you do that , a Variable Annuity does n't get pitched , it becomes the product of choice by the client because of the features that it offers .
When servicemembers separate from the service , they have the opportunity to convert their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be done within a short time . If a veteran is looking for life insurance after some years of being out of the service , there is not a VA policy especially for them , but they can get private life insurance as can anyone of that age group .
There is life insurance for veterans provided by the VA called VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be purchased shortly after separation from the service . If getting a private policy , a veteran can get any life insurance policy that anyone else can get , as long and age and health guidelines are met .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Can You Buy A Medigap Policy ?
You are allowed to purchase a Medigap policy at any time . Most will purchase a Medigap plan when they initially turn 65 and are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . Some will purchase a Medigap plan following a qualifying event , such as loss of employer group coverage or involuntary loss of an Advantage plan .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best time to buy a Medigap policy is when you are first eligible , i.e. during your 6-month Medigap open enrollment period , because you can buy any Medigap policy sold in your state , even if you have health problems . This period automatically starts the month you 're 65 and enrolled in Medicare Part B , and once it 's over , you ca n't get it again . Medigap insurance companies are generally allowed to use medical underwriting to decide whether to accept your application and how much to charge you for the Medigap policy . However , if you apply during your Medigap open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap policy the company sells , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people with good health .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan at any point during the year - Medigap plans are not subjected to the same restrictions as Parts C & D of Medicare . You can complete an application up to 3 months in advance of the proposed effective date for the coverage - please note , you have to have both Medicare Part A & Part B to buy a Medigap plan . For example , if your effective date is April 1st , you could apply as early as January 1st . And vice versa - you can set the effective date up to 3 months later from the application date -LRB- most will set it up for the 1st of the following month though -RRB- . The effective date for your Medicare Part B coverage is also the starting point for your initial open enrollment period - a 6-month window where you can buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting -LRB- this is the best time to buy a Medigap plan -RRB- . Beyond this window , you will be required to answer health questions on the applications and go through medical underwriting -LRB- there are no exams though -RRB- , unless you have a qualifying event for a guaranteed-issue right . You should work through a broker who can shop the case for you and find you the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . It 's important to review your Medigap plan every year to see if a lower rate is available after the initial rate lock guarantee expires and/or when you have a rate increase . The benefits of a Medigap plan do not change from company to company - they are exactly the same . A plan F from one company features the exact same benefits as a plan F from another company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can be declined for Medigap insurance , but there 's usually a company that will likely take you unless certain events occur -LRB- e.g. you 're about to go in for major surgery -RRB- When you apply for Medigap coverage outside of your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare -LRB- and do n't have a special enrollment period qualifying event -RRB- , you can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering the health questions on the application -RRB- . Each insurance company has their own health questions so you may be able to qualify for one company and not another if you have certain major medical conditions you 're being treated for/have been treated for in the last few years -LRB- e.g. insulin-dependent diabetic , heart disease , cancer history , etc. -RRB- . This makes when you 're new to Medicare the best time to first buy a Medigap plan . You will have a a 6-month window to buy any Medigap plan and the carrier can not decline you for any medical issues - meaning no medical underwriting during this period . You should work with an independent broker who can review options from many companies and make sure that the Medigap plan you purchase is offering you the benefits at the lowest possible cost . Please remember , Medigap plans are standardized , meaning that regardless of the insurance company you have the coverage through , they will ALL pay the same exact way . The only difference is the price you 're paying . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap insurance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you want to help fill in the gaps that Original Medicare does n't cover , then you should consider buying Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance . A Medigap Policy can help pay your share of Medicare-covered services -LRB- the co-insurance , co-pays and deductibles -RRB- . Generally , Original Medicare Part A and B only cover 80 % percent of your health care costs , leaving you with the remaining 20 % to pay out of your pocket -- unless you have a Medigap Plan . If you have a significant health issue arise , twenty percent can get hit your budget pretty hard . A $ 3,000 procedure will cost you $ 600 in co-insurance . A $ 10,000 procedure will cost you $ 1,000 . Surgery costing $ 100,000 will leave you with a hefty $ 20,000 bill . Some people believe they should wait until their health dictates a need for Medigap insurance . Unfortunately , waiting is not the best option as you may not qualify for Medigap insurance once you `` need '' it . Medigap insurance companies are not bound to the Affordable Care Act , so they can ask health questions -LRB- unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation or your initial Open Enrollment period -RRB- . Your Medigap application will have to be approved through the medical underwriting department . To find out if you are in your initial Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation , you can work with an agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance or call Medicare directly . If you do qualify , you 'll be able to buy a Medigap Plan in your state and not be required to answer any health questions . If I can assist you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
You are eligible for Medigap coverage if you have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B active . When you first enroll in Part B , you trigger a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as Medicare Supplement plans -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is the BEST time to buy a supplement plan because regardless of your medical history , you can buy any Medigap plan from any carrier and can not be declined . Plans F and G offer the most comprehensive coverage and therefore the most predictable expense structure - a major benefit for individuals on a fixed income . Please note , Medigap plans are standardized so the difference between carriers is price - plan F is the exact same plan F from every insurance company . Beyond this window , you 'll be subject to answering health questions to qualify for a new plan -LRB- every carriers ' questions are different -RRB- if you do n't have a guaranteed-issue right available to you . If you 're under 65 , you can still purchase a Medigap plan if you 're on Medicare for disability or ESRD , but the cost will be very high . Medigap plans are designed to be purchased by individuals age 65 and up . Under age 65 individuals on Medicare will likely either buy a Medicare Advantage plan or stay under original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and add a stand-alone Part D plan for their prescription drug coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You should buy your Medigap plan when you 're new to Medicare - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medicare supplement plan because you have a 6-month window -LRB- your initial open enrollment period - starts from your Medicare Part B effective date -RRB- to apply for any Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . This means that a carrier can not decline you for coverage for any pre-existing conditions or other medical-related illness . Beyond this window , you 'll be subject to answering health questions to qualify for a new plan -LRB- every carriers ' questions are different -RRB- if you do n't have a guaranteed-issue right available to you . Anyone over the age of 65 and has Medicare Part A & Part B can buy a Medigap plan . If you 're under 65 , you can still purchase a Medigap plan if you 're on Medicare for disability or ESRD , but the cost will be very high . Medigap plans are designed to be purchased by individuals age 65 and up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage , quotes , and comparisons of plans and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You should buy your Medigap plan when you 're new to Medicare - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medicare supplement plan because you have a 6-month window -LRB- your initial open enrollment period - starts from your Medicare Part B effective date -RRB- to apply for any Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . This means that a carrier can not decline you for coverage for any pre-existing conditions or other medical-related illness.Beyond this window , you 'll be subject to answering health questions to qualify for a new plan -LRB- every carriers ' questions are different -RRB- if you do n't have a guaranteed-issue right available to you . Anyone over the age of 65 and has Medicare Part A & Part B can buy a Medigap plan . If you 're under 65 , you can still purchase a Medigap plan if you 're on Medicare for disability or ESRD , but the cost will be very high . Medigap plans are designed to be purchased by individuals age 65 and up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage , quotes , and comparisons of plans and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Anyone over the age of 65 and on Medicare can buy a Medigap plan . The best time to buy is when you 're new to Medicare as you 'll have a 6-month window -LRB- from your Medicare Part B effective date -RRB- to buy any Medigap plan you want with NO medical underwriting . Beyond this window , you 'll be subject to answering health questions to qualify for a new plan -LRB- every carriers ' questions are different -RRB- if you do n't have a guaranteed-issue right available to you . If you 're under 65 , you can still purchase a Medigap plan if you 're on Medicare for disability or ESRD , but the cost will be very high . Medigap plans are designed to be purchased by individuals age 65 and up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
There is an `` open enrollment period '' during which you can buy any Medigap insurance policy -LRB- Plan F -RRB- sold in your state beginning the month in which you turn age 65 and you are enrolled in Medicare Part B . During this six month open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap insurance offered , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people in good health . If you apply for Medigap coverage after your open enrollment period , there 's no guarantee that an insurance company will sell you a Medigap policy if you dont meet the medical underwriting requirements , unless you 're eligible because you have group health insurance through an employer or union . If this is your situation , the Medigap enrollment period begins when you sign-up for Part B . There are some situations if you are under 65 and are eligible for Medicare because of a disability you could be eligible for Medigap coverage . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and are under 65 , some states require at least one type of Medigap policy to be offered to you .
Any Medicare Beneficiary who has Original Medicare , with both Part A & Part B Active . The best time to purchase a Medigap Policy -LSB- also known as Medicare Supplement -RSB- is during your initial 6-month Medigap open enrollment period , because you can buy any Medigap policy sold in your state , even if you have health problems . You can also buy during the Open Enrollment -LSB- October 15-December 7 -RSB- . Medigap insurance companies are generally allowed to use medical underwriting to decide whether to accept your application and how much to charge you for the Medigap policy . There are several Medical Guarantee Issue Rights that will allow you to purchase a Medigap policy without underwriting questions affecting the outcome . I can provide a list if you are interested .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Get Help With Car Insurance ?
As a trusted experienced agent , we help consumers with their car insurance , by offering unbiased advice and free quotes from the top-rated insurance companies . Each situation is different and the best options for you may be completely different than what 's best for other persons . Coverage , underwriting guidelines and policy provisions should always be discussed .
To get professional help contact a trusted insurance agent . If you dont have a trusted insurance agent get a recommendation from your friends , colleagues and neighbors . If you are asking about financial assistance for paying the premium for an auto policy , that is beyond my scope . I dont know . I would assume that there are some programs that would help you , but I dont know which programs .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
If you 're auto insurance is just too expensive for you to afford , there are some things you can do to help ease that burden . You may not like some of my advice , but it 's the right advice . A very large part of your insurance premium is the physical damage to the car itself . Raising deductibles will lower your premiums somewhat . Ask yourself if you really need to cover the physical damage at all . If it 's an older car and you own it outright , this could be an option . Before you do this , however , understand that , if your car is damaged , the insurance company will not pay to fix it . One thing not to do is to lower your bodily injury liability limits . You wo n't save very much and you 'll be putting everything you own at risk , including your income . Here 's the advice you may not like : Perhaps you have too nice a car for your budget . If that 's the case , get a less expensive car . Then , when your finances -LRB- or your driving record -RRB- allow , you can always get a nicer car . Talk to an agent you can trust . They can give you advice on these questions as well as others . It also helps if you check rates on a car before you buy it . Everyone loves getting a new car . You just do n't want an unpleasant surprise when your insurance bill comes .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Coverage follows the car . Example 1 : If you were given a car -LRB- loaned -RRB- and the car has no insurance , you can buy insurance on the car and your insurance will be primary . Another option , someone helped you to buy a car . For example your credit score is n't good enough to finance , so a friend of yours signed under your loan as a primary payor . You can get insurance under your name and even list your friend on the policy as a loss payee . In this case , we always suggest you get a loan gap coverage : the difference between the car 's actual cash value and the amount still owned on it . Example 2 : The car you are loaned has insurance . You can buy a policy under your name , list the car on that policy and in case of the accident , your policy will become a secondary or excess . Once the limits of the primary car insurance are exhausted , your coverage would kick in and hopefully pay for the rest . I specifically used the word hopefully , because each accident is unique and it 's hard to interpret the coverage without the actual claim scenario . And even with a given claim scenario , sometimes there are 2 possible outcomes of a claim .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Great question , but I am afraid I have to say it depends . Each car on your policy will be rated according to who owns it , uses and how they use it , as well as the specific characteristics of the car itself . If you have only one car on your policy now you will be pleased to learn that most carriers offer a multi-car discount.The theory being you can not be driving both cars at once . Many agents and companies can do `` what if '' scenarios to price your additional car , and even if they do not have that capability , they can help you understand the differences that might exist between different makes and models . I would also suggest you also check the info from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety as they test the car in crash situations to understand how a specific vehicle type will respond .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
If your car is considered totaled then a good indicator would go look at NADA > com or Kelly blue book online this would be a close estimate as to what they will give you now if you decided to keep the car you can do that also but you will get less cash for your car from the claim . Another way you can do this is make sure that you know the value of your auto you can call car dealerships and they can tell you what the car was worth prior to the accident . Insurance is to indemnify not to put you ahead . What you think your car is worth may not be as much as an adjuster thinks so be prepared and have a realistic value for your auto . Also if you had optional permanently attached equipment make sure that your policy had that listed or you may not get the value of that included . Hope this helps My best suggestion is to talk to you agent they should be able to help you with determining the value .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Market value -LRB- what others would pay for same car -RRB- with plus or minus depending on features , condition of vehcle , age , mileage -LRB- thats a big one -RRB- , type of car , quality of car , car been wrecked or under water ... As much as they cost now I recommend that you always get REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE and you get GAP COVERAGE . ALSO , GET EXTENDED WARRANTY FROM THE DEALER . I have been involved in these issues so many times that I still sit down and cry like a baby . People get it in the back so many times just because they are ignorant of coverages that are available to them ... shame shame agents and shame shame tightwad idiots
Yes , for the following reason . When lease/finance a car part of the agreement to get funding for your car is auto insurance . The reason for this is the entity who has financed your purchase wants a guarantee that in the event the car is destroyed , they will get repaid . The finance company thinks of it in these terms : if you lose the car , then there is no incentive for you to pay them back and their collateral is gone . So , to cover their tails they require that they be put on the title and listed as a loss payee on your insurance . If you do not carry enough insurance , it is a breach of the contract you signed . This , in effect , is like missing a car payment . Thus , if you breach the contract by not carrying adequate insurance your car will be repossessed . I hope this helps .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Will Renters Insurance Cover Vandalism ?
Vandalism is a common covered peril listed in most property policies including Renters ' . It is always a good idea to discuss your policies terms and conditions with your Insurance Professional in order to better understand your particular coverage benefits and options . That is also a great opportunity to ask about any additional discount benefits available .
If your car is the unfortunate victim of vandalism , will your current car insurance policy cover the claim ? The answer to this question depends on the type of auto insurance coverage you currently carry . If you only carry the minimum liability limits , the answer is no . However , if you carry comprehensive coverage , the answer is yes less any applicable annual deductible you have selected for your policy . Vandalism to your vehicle could include a variety of incidents ; key scratches , broken glass and other damage caused with malicious intent . Vandalism is different than burglary . If something was removed from your vehicle as a result of the vandalism , you must be sure to state this in your report . In most cases , comprehensive coverage will cover both theft and vandalism . The amount of coverage your policy offers depends not only on the overall type of policy you have selected , but the coverage limits , the type of claim , and your chosen annual deductible . In the case of high deductible policies , it may be more beneficial to pay for the repairs out of pocket than to run it through your insurance company . Before any claim will be paid , you must file a report with your local police department describing the nature of the vandalism .
Most people consider purchasing renter 's insurance to cover their personal belongings - most renter 's policies will pay for the loss of personal property due to theft , vandalism , fire , etc. . However , a renter 's policy can also provide coverage if you are personally liable for injury to another person or damage to their property due to a non-vehicle related incident . In addition , a renter 's policy may also pay for `` loss of use '' due to a covered loss , meaning if you are forced to temporarily relocate due to said loss , there may be coverage for related expenses . Renter 's insurance is typically very affordable . Premiums can vary from one person to another , and some companies may offer better prices than others depending on your location , but I 've seen renter 's policies as low as $ 9 or $ 10/month . Please bear in mind that there are a lot of variables that affect your rate , and you may or may not be able to find renter 's insurance for this kind of price .
No , there is no coverage in your Renters ' Insurance Policy for damage to your car for vandalism or any other reason . This coverage is available under the Comprehensive portion of your Car Insurance policy -LRB- for vandalism -RRB- . That having been said , if someone breaks into your car and takes personal items those personal items would be covered under a typical Renters ' Insurance policy subject to policy coverage limitations and the deductible .
Vandalism to a vehicle is typically covered under the comprehensive portion of your car insurance . Fire , theft and vandalism are three of the biggest components of the comprehensive section of your policy . Usually , the deductible is considerably lower than your collision deductible . Vandalism is covered under your homeowner 's insurance policy , although it would apply to contents of your home , the dwelling and other structures . Vandalism to personal property inside a vehicle would be a different type of claim than the vehicle itself .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Renters Insurance does cover broken items as a result of a covered loss ; perils may be fire , theft , vandalism etc. ... It is important to review your current policy and assess what perils the policy covers against . If an item is covered and claimable under your renters insurance , it would be preferable to have a replacement cost policy thus providing the replacement value of the item rather than the depreciated value ; also , the applicable deductible will be deducted from the claim payout . For those seeking #rentersinsurance , there is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Renters insurance covers your personal contents of your rented property . If you vehicle was vandalized that is a comprehensive claim under your auto insurance , assuming that you carry comprehensive coverage . If you do not carry comprehensive they only thing to do is sue the person who vandalized your car , and most likly you do not know who they are . Sorry about your misfortune and best of luck to you .
Renter 's Insurance will cover your personal property for damage from insured perils . You can buy different policies , so it is important to understand what perils are covered by your particular policy , but most will cover fire , wind and theft . They also may cover damage to personal property from burst plumbing , vandalism , explosion . Another part of Renter 's Insurance -LRB- Liability -RRB- will protect you from lawsuits for a number of different things -LRB- injury to people on the premises , dog bite liability , certain types of accidental damage to the premises .
A homeowners policy -LRB- primary occupied dwelling -RRB- written on a special form would cover vandalism . This is not to be mistaken with a rental property which may exclude vandalism , especially if caused by tenants . Check with your agent for the details and coverages of your particular policy to see if your policy includes vandalism coverages .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Renters insurance would not cover the vandalism to your car , but could cover vandalism to the personal belongings inside the car , if they in fact were vandalized . You would need auto physical damage coverage in place to cover the vandalism . In lieu of liability coverage on your car , you need `` other than collision '' coverage or `` comprehensive '' coverage which are synonymous with each other . Good luck with your claim And please do n't hesitate to contact me with any additional questions that may help you out . Best , Josh DeBoer 918-582-8206 jdeboer@fdands.com
It can . Vandalism is covered under comprehensive which is one of two types of coverage that can be included under physical damage on your auto policy . The other coverage that protects your actual vehicle is collision . Comprehensive and collision are required when you have a loan but are optional when you do n't . These two coverages provide protection for the car itself if it gets damaged and typically requires that you pay a deductible first before the insurance company responds . Typically , collision covers anything you collide or have an upset with while comprehensive covers everything else including fire , theft , and vandalism .
Yes civil disorder is one of the perils most policies will cover . If your home is damaged or destroyed in a riot or civil unrest it will be repaired or replaced along with any personal property damaged or destroyed . Homeowners Insurance also covers vandalism if your home is damaged by vandals .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Renters insurance covers your belongings whether they are in your garage or in your apartment or wherever they are as long as the loss is covered under the policy subject to your deductible . It has to be a covered peil such as fire , theft , vandalism , lightening , wind or other perils specified in your policy .
A good renters insurance policy will cover your personal belongings for fire , lightning , wind , vandalism and other named perils as well as theft and liability . It covers everything but the building and items owned by the building . It is the landlords responsibility to cover those . There are some basic fire policies that are more limited in nature so make sure you know what you are buying .
Homeowners Insurance is most often written on Form HO-3 ; the Form HO-3 Homeowners Special Form does include damage from the perils Vandalism and Malicious Mischief . The coverage will apply to the Dwelling and Detached Structures covered by the policy ; however , the deductible will apply . On the other hand , if only Basic Fire Coverage is purchased , sometimes known as ` Fire & Lightning ' , there would be no coverage afforded for damage caused by vandalism . This would apply to forms HO-1 or DP-1 which are the most basic forms of coverage available for single family residences . It is important that you review your specific insurance policy to assure that you are certain of what is covered ; also , you may contact a company representative for a detailed review of your policy !
Vandalism to a car is not typically covered under a homeowners insurance policy . If you wish to have vandalism coverage for your automobile then you need to purchase comprehensive coverage from your auto insurance carrier . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverages provided by your policy and any exclusions that may be contained within the policy .
end question
