start question
life-insurance
What To Do With Universal Life Insurance ?
That is a great question ! And an interesting one . I guess the answer depends upon how long you 've had the policy , and how well you 've kept track of it ; or whether it is a good policy to get at all , if I 'm reading into your question rightly . Here 's what I advise people . A UL policy can be a good thing if you are somebody that keeps an eye on everything , and has extra money lying around . You also have to have a healthy risk tolerance . Agents will rightly tell you that this type of policy can bring great returns , but press them hard , and make them tell you exactly what stars and moons need to align for that to happen . What is the actual performance of the policy over time , not the best case scenario printed in the sales brochure ? How much over the minimum payment is required to achieve that performance ? That 's what you need to know if you are thinking of purchasing one . If you already have one , are you paying attention to how well it is still funded ? You could be in for a surprise if you have n't . Call your agent , and get an idea of how it 's doing for you , and how long you can expect it to be in force . Functionally , you can use the proceeds for everything that you would any other whole life insurance policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
If you are considering buying Universal Life , you can use it for final expense needs , estate transfer , buy-sell agreements , charitable contributions , retirement income -LRB- IUL -RRB- , and many other purposes . If you already have a Universal Life policy and are wondering whether you should keep it , that depends on how the policy is doing . Many people lost their UL policies in the past decade when interest rates dropped . But if you still have one purchased in the 80 's or 90 's , chances are that you have made adjustments that will last . Consult with an ethical life insurance professional who can study your UL 's performance and help you decide whether or not to keep it .
As any investment buy and hold in most casesis the best advice I could give for several reasons . And yes this policy is an investment because of the indexed savings and no risk of loosing your principle . The compound interest gives me an high interest in this policy for my family , clients and associates it is part of my portfolio at least the next 15 years and should be in yours also .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
There are two types of life insurance : Term and Permanent life insurance . Term life insurance is for a time certain period of coverage to indemnify your beneficiaries from financial liability . Permanent life insurance is for ongoing financial liabilities that may never terminate . Depending upon your age term life insurance issues at guaranteed periods of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurances can mature up to age 121 and some polices actually isle the life of the insured . Permanent life insurance can be classified into two categories : Par whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life has four policy platforms : Guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life .
The only type of life insurance that you can borrow from is Universal Life or Whole Life . You can not borrow from Term Life . There are many types of Universal Life and Whole Life , and especially with Universal Life , some policies will have very little cash value . If you are purchasing a Universal Life policy for the purpose of borrowing from it , you will do best with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life .
While both universal life and whole life insurance are permanent products and have a death benefit the similarities end there . Whole life insurance has a guarantee premium for the life of the contract and generally is credited by a dividend or return of unused premium . Universal life gas four policy types : current assumption universal life , guaranteed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . With the exception of guaranteed universal life , the others have flexible premiums or death benefit that can be changed by the policy owner .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
Life Insurance is a mortality product constructed to cover temporary -LRB- term insurance -RRB- or permanent -LRB- permanent insurance -RRB- financial liabilities . Is your financial liability temporary or perpetual ? Term life insurance is generally offered in increments of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life polices can cover you to age 121 and has five policy types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . There are three major planning categories for life insurance : indemnification , income and inheritance . First , determine which planning category you need . If the planning category is indemnification and/or inheritance then determine is the need temporary or permanent ? The solution is either term or guaranteed universal life insurance . If the planning category is income , life insurance can be a supplemental retirement alternative . Here 's some product alternatives : current assumption universal life insurance with three crediting methods : interest rates , indices and separate sub account performance using the lowest TAMRA compliant death benefit option . For income , you may also want to look at TAMRA compliant lowest death benefit , participating whole life , with a max term rider and a paid up additions rider .
The first consideration in purchasing a life insurance policy is to determine what planning goal you are attempting to achieve : indemnification , income or inheritance . Indemnification can be temporary or permanent . If the economic liability is temporary then term life insurance which -LRB- depending upon your age -RRB- can be purchased up to 30 years . If the economic liability is permanent then guaranteed universal life can be purchased to age 121 . Income and inheritance planning goals require permanent life insurance policies . Income goals with life insurance are generally considered because of the tax advantages and crediting method options : For market risk investing , variable universal life insurance . For domestic and foreign indice investing , indexed universal life . For interest rate investing , current assumption universal life insurance or participating whole life insurance . For inheritance , guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- insurance for singles and GUL survivorship for couples .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
With a few tactical answers to a data collector , recommendations can be made . First what is your planning goal ? Is it an indemnification , income and inheritance scenario ? How long do you need to cover your financial scenario ? What is your medical condition , including smoking status ? Term life insurance provides temporary coverage for a temporary financial liability to indemnify your beneficiaries from economic loss at your demise . If that financial liability is ongoing beyond 30 years , youll need a permanent life insurance policy like guaranteed universal life or whole life insurance . If your financial goal is income , you should review participating whole life or current assumption universal life . Current assumption universal life has three crediting methods : interest rate , domestic/foreign indices or equity/bond subaccount . If your financial goal is to make a difference in your children , grandchildren , favorite charity or pay estate taxes , then survivorship policies for married couples and single policies for singles using guaranteed universal life or whole life insurance .
Flexible premium adjustable life is the more antiquated title of universal life . Today , there are four different universal life polices. : current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . These three is feature the flexibility or adjust-ability of premiums and death benefit amounts . Guaranteed universal life , in general terms , does not have this flexible feature based on it 's secondary guarantees .
You can borrow against permanent life insurance -LRB- also called cash value life insurance -RRB- policies that have enough cash value for borrowing . The two major types of permanent life insurance are Whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life includes fixed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . It is imperative to make sure that you do n't borrow too much from the policy and cause it to lapse . A lapsed policy with a loan against it can result in tax implications for the policy owner .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
Some differences between Term and Universal Life are : 1 -RRB- Term rates are locked in for a set number of years . Universal life rates may be locked in for life -LRB- but not always -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Term rates are based on cost of insurance . Universal Life rates are based on costs of insurance and interest rates . 3 -RRB- Term rates must be paid within at least two months of the due date , or the policy will lapse . Universal rates may possibly be paid by cash value within the policy -LRB- but not always -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Term policies do not have any cash value . Universal Life policies may have cash value -LRB- but not always -RRB- . 5 -RRB- Term policies are pretty inflexible . Universal Life policies have much more flexibility .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Who Is The Best Car Insurance Company For Young Drivers ?
This will depend on what your definition of good is . If you are defining good as low rates , you will have to do some checking with local agents in area to find out about coverage availability and rates . If you are in Wisconsin the company that I work with at this time tends to have very good rates with young drivers in the household .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
This is not always the case there are some carriers that actually give you young driver discount and also if you have good grades that help . The main reason it is higher is because you are less experienced driver and are more likely to have an accident but there are many factors for this . Also the type of car you drive makes a difference also . I insure a 17 yr old who is on her own policy and has had tickets and drives a 2 door car and with just liability is only $ 160 a month that is not a bad rate as here inMontana the average young driver you can figures is 100 a month before you even think about adding a car this is being added to another policy . My recommendations are to talk to a local agent and see what type of discounts they offer for younger drivers and if you are being listed on another persons policy or not .
Statistically young drivers present the greatest risk for a claim to an insurance carrier due to their inexperience behind the wheel . Young drivers are more likely to be involved in some sort of questionable or reckless activity . This does mean that every young driver is irresponsible or that they will be involved in activities that will cause a claim . Many young drivers are more responsible and less reckless than older drivers but insurance carriers tend to create rates based on age and geographic location as major factors .
The cheapest car insurance for young will depend on your state and zip code . If you are a Maryland resident and you are between the agesof 16 and 20 , it will be very difficult not impossible to find insurance in the standard market . Some exceptions to this is when the Child goes on Parents Insurance policy . In Maryland , MAIF or the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund insures most young and inexperience drivers or experience driver with accidents and tickets . They must have been declined coverage by at least two standard insurance companies or none renewed by one to qualify for coverage with MAIF . In some cases Progressive may also be good with young drivers but their rates are better if the driver is at least 21 and have good credit score Hope this helps .
Here in CT , one must be at least 16 years of age in order to obtain a drivers license . A 15 year old has the opportunity to obtain a learners ' permit within the regulations of the Department of Motor Vehicles , but does not have to be listed as a driver on the parent 's policy . Other states may be different . Once a young driver receives his or her license , then they need to be listed on their parent 's auto policy as a regular driver in their home with access to their vehicles . If the 16 year old purchases a car of their own and wishes to register in in their own name , then they will need to obtain their own separate auto policy in order to accomplish that . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the laws in your state and the best options available for both you and your young driver .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
The obvious answer is to check with several local insurance agencies for pricing evaluations . Insurance prices are often a serious issue for many families , of course . There is definitive sensitivity to family budgets , However , being driven by the lowest prices is going to result in purchasing low liability limits . Think in terms of each young driver having at least one at-fault accident in the next 12-18 months . Then think how much damage might occur , in each occurrence . Let 's say your first young family driver , due to inattentiveness - -LRB- remember when you were a young driver ? -RRB- - rear-ends a fairly new mid-priced automobile , causing $ 5,000 in damages . Worse , the driver of the other vehicle claims to have sustained neck and back pains , goes to an attorney and starts the process of accumulating medical expenses . Not uncommon at all . Now , add an alleged injured passenger in the car that was rear-ended . Do some quick math as to the possible costs and keep that number in mind when considering how much you might have to pay out-of-pocket , based on the low liability limits that you are weighing , to save money on the premium .
Generally speaking , yes , car insurance premiums tend to be higher for younger less experienced drivers . Certainly rates can vary between companies , but paying a bit more for your youthful driver should be something for which you plan . Talk to your Insurance Professional about taking advantage of any available discounts . Your company may offer such discounts for your young driver attending and graduating from a Drivers Ed class . Keeping their grades at `` B '' or better may also help . If you have less cars than drivers , your child could qualify for `` Occasional Driver '' rates .
Many different statistics are analyzed by iInsurance Companies when developing their rate for various classes of drivers . Over the years , it has been fairly typical that those statistics indicated that inexperienced young male drivers have tended to be involved and or responsible for more auto accidents than have their female counterparts . As a result , rates for young men have been generally higher than those for young women . You and your parents should speak with your Insurance Professional about any and all available discounts in order to help you manage the cost of your car insurance . Ask about discounts for good grades , driver education course completion and bundling along with anoy other options they may have to offer .
Your daughter was not the prominent rating factor for the vehicle . Since you only have two cars and 3 drivers you were rating a spare driver . I would assume the other driver who is not yourself has a impact on the rate . Either a young driver or a driver with some violations may be in play . Actually your agent should be able to look at your policy and easily figure out what is driving the rate . You say she was paying 900.00 for the car she was rated on but actually this would be been inaccurate in the first place . Hard to explain in this type of format . Call your agent to get a better explanation since he or she has details of your policy .
The best place to start is by talking to your Insurance Professional about your existing car insurance . Ask about any and all available discounts that your company may offer . If you have 2 cars and your daughter will make 3 drivers , she might be elligible for occasional driver rates which can save money . Likewise , her successful completion your state approved Driver Education course and a maintenance of good grades in school can also certainly help keep the premiums down . LIke the rest of us , it is also critical that your young driver follow the rules of the road and operate your car in a lawful and prudent manner in order to avoid tickets and accidents .
I love CPA 's . They give great accounting advice and some of them even know other things . But the `` minimum limits '' advice defies his training in some important ways . What your son lacks in `` assets '' he more than makes up for in terms of `` potential '' . What I mean here is that he may not have it now , but due to his young age , he 'll have a long time to earn and pay . Even though he is only 18 does not mean that he can not be responsible for an injury or death , or damage to property , and be subjected to an order of the court to garnishee his wage to make reimbursement to those who were injured , killed , or had property damaged . Now , should have have his own insurance ? Assuming he owns the car , he probably needs his own insurance . Staying in the household under household coverage is also OK but some insurers concern themselves with the owner of the car being different than the insured on the policy so proceed with caution when the vehicle is not actually owned by the policyholder . As a practical matter , the discounts that you might enjoy are lost to the child in many cases when they have their own policy . Some companies will extend multi-policy discounts to children of the policy owner . Some discounts do n't come through this connection , however . I like kids learning the responsibility of maintaining their own insurance . It gets the loss off the parents record , for one . Parents can help subsidize the cost if they want and help provide this as a reward for good outcomes on something else . All things said and done , I like responsible children on their own policies but deal with young drivers both on and off the parents policies so it comes down to personal preference and whether you are dealing with issues that poison the whole policy because of the young driver , or not , in many cases .
That is a great question ! The thing to know about any insurance is that the costs are always based in great part on the risk of loss that the company has to shell out for . Any young or new driver will have a greater risk as they gain experience than an established driver , so the company will charge them more than the experienced driver . Young men in particular are a greater risk , and as a result , their rates are higher than most other drivers . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Any licensed driver that resides in your household must be included on the auto insurance policies written on cars belonging to your household . There isnt an option . A licensed driver can not sit on a shelf and not be rated on an existing automobile . If the insurance company can determine which vehicle the inexperienced operator drives , they will rate the youthful driver as the primary driver unless there are more drivers than vehicles . Even then the youthful driver will be listed as an occasional operator on one of the vehicles . It is best to consult with your agent to determine the best car for the inexperienced driver to operate . The charge for a youthful driver is generally a percentage of the normal premium , so assigning the youthful driver to a car with a low premium generally makes the best sense .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
A teenager must be included in a car insurance policy as soon as they have a license . In California that usually means that they will be assigned to a vehicle in the household where they are living . To comply with state law each driver must be insured to operate a car . For a variety of reasons many young people do not get drivers licenses at the earliest possible age . I have seen drivers being added onto policies after age 20 . Some students pursue such rigorous academic studies that driving is not an option . The bad news is that in California it isnt your age when you start driving but the number of years experience you have as a driver that will determine the classification used on your automobile insurance .
Auto insurance generally follows a vehicle , so guest drivers are usuallycovered . Your insurance company has the right to contest claims made by people who are excluded from your policy . If you permit someone to driveyour car regularly , he or she should be listed as an operator . It can be considered fraudulent if you share a car with someone on a regular basis without listing that person on the policy . Examples would be a young driver or someone with a DUI . Always read your policy document , and remember , if it is your car , you will be held liable if the damages exceed your insurance policy , so be careful before lending out your vehicle .
Good Question your teen must have a driver license . Some companies have better rate than other for young drivers and give discounts such as good student , teen driving education and other discount . Check with your current provider and also call a local insurance broker who can shop around for the best rate for your new driver .
end question
start question
annuities
What Is Enhanced Annuities ?
Enhanced annuities are lifetime annuities that pay a higher than normal income to annuity holders because the the annuitants have poor health . Because the annuitants have lower life expectancies , their annuities are able to pay them more each month , as it is anticipated that the monthly payments will not reasonably last as long as for those in good health .
Enhanced annuities are generally immediate , lifetime income annuities that pay more in the payout period due to the health factors of the annuitant -LRB- person upon whose life annuity payments are based -RRB- . Lifetime annuities pay out until the annuitant dies -LRB- plus any guarantees built into the contract -RRB- . Annuity payments are based on actuarial tables . If the person receiving the payments lives longer than expected , it is to their advantage . Enhanced annuities or Impaired annuities pay extra because the annuitant has a shorter life expectancy . This can be due to health conditions or health habits such as smoking .
Enhanced annuities are also called impaired annuities . When calculating how much lump sum premium is needed to provide a given income for your lifetime , insurance companies use actuarial tables . These tables are based on age , sex and health . If your life expectancy is much lower based on a health impairment for example you could apply for an enhanced annuity . If approved your level of income would be higher . That is a simple explanation of a potentially complex subject . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Enhanced whole life insurance is most likely a marketing name for a specific companies life insurance contract . There is no specific product within the industry that is referred to specifically as enhanced whole life insurance -LRB- i.e. there are no features unique to a products known as enhanced whole life insurance -RRB- .
Hybrid annuities are fixed indexed annuities , equity indexed annuities , or variable annuities with a rider that offers lifetime income . Some also offer enhanced death benefit , long term care , and/or home health care . Hybrid annuities work by allowing the buyer to invest funds in a fixed account as well as variable account . The fixed account provides the guaranteed funds and the variable components provide for greater return by investing in non-guaranteed securities .
Enhanced annuities are lifetime annuities that pay a higher than normal income to annuity holders because the the annuitants have poor health . Because the annuitants have lower life expectancies , their annuities are able to pay them more each month , as it is anticipated that the monthly payments will not reasonably last as long as for those in good health .
When you apply for life insurance , you can be rated , or pay an additional premium , for certain conditions that are expected to shorten your life expectancy . Cancer , heart conditions , liver conditions , weight , high cholesterol , diabetes and other health issues are among the health issues that can cause ratings . There seems to be no official start date on record , but I can attest that since the 1970 's , enhanced annuities , also known as enriched or impaired annuities , have taken shortened life expectancy into consideration . Shortened life span , means you are not expected to live as long . Consequently , the life annuity income payments will be larger since they are expected to be paid out over a shorter period of time . The types , qualifications and annuity payments can vary significantly from company to company so it is important to check . It is your money . An independent life insurance broker , representing several insurance companies , can help you find an annuity that is right for you . If you have further questions . or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Most Fixed Annuities cost nothing . Meaning that they have no fees that deduct from the account or that you have to pay out of pocket . Some Fixed Annuities do offer Riders that you pay a yearly fee for . These Riders usually guarantee a lifetime of income , a death benefit , or provide some other enhanced benefit . The fee is usually taken as a percentage of the Account Value . Fees can be as low as 0.2 % all the way to slightly over 1 % , it all depends on the benefit chosen and the company . Variable Annuities do automatically come with fees . They charge a M&E fee along with investment expenses . Consult a Variable Annuity Agent for specific info .
Golden Rule is a subsidiary of United Healthcare . Golden Rule issues individual major medical plans in select states . Most of the policies do include mental health benefits as required by your state department of insurance . In some cases you may `` buy up '' from the standard mental health benefit to an enhanced plan . The enhanced plan , where offered , replaces the usual limited benefit mental health benefit with one that treats mental health as `` any other illness '' .
Whole life insurance is for a very special kind of person . First of all , you are someone who sees the need for life insurance protection on a lifelong basis . Not just to cover the mortgage , not just to protect your family , not just as a supplement for your retirement . You face the fact that as life goes on , your need for life insurance changes , but for many people , the need is always there . And it could be for you . You know that if you bought term insurance , odds are you 'd end up buying another policy anyway , after that one renews . At a higher price . And hopefully youre insurable . Might as well lock in to guaranteed rates on a permanent basis . This brings up the second point . You are a guarantee-oriented type of person . You realize that life insurance is the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it has to be strong . Reliable . You do n't want too many variables in this product because , if you have a shaky foundation , your whole portfolio could crumble . Therefore , you want a guarantee on the premium , and you want a guarantee on the death benefit . You are also someone who appreciates the added benefit of cash value inside whole life insurance . For many people , whole life insurance is the guaranteed portion of their asset portfolio . No other product gives better guarantees -LRB- go ahead and check out the interest rates on guaranteed products out there . Then compare them to the guarantees whole life gives you . -RRB- On top of that , with a top-flight company , the dividends - the non-guaranteed portion of the cash build up - can be pretty rich . With a little strategic thinking , those dividends can enhance the value of that product . They can be used to offset the cost . They can be used to enhance the survivor benefit . They can be used to put cash in your pocket . They can be used to offset the cost of another policy . Lastly , whole life insurance is for disciplined people . In order to receive all the benefits named above , you need to stick to the payment schedule . It 's a fixed-premium product and will not tolerate underfunding , or over funding , or skipping payments . If you realize the bang for the buck you can get with whole life insurance , and have the discipline to stick to a premium payment schedule , then you 'll be glad you bought this policy .
Many companies have employer sponsored defined contribution plans like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- offered to their employees , some even auto enroll . These plans have pretax contributions and accumulate tax deferred . Some employers actually match a portion of their employees contribution further enhancing the employees retirement account . Having a retirement account at work can help you save something every paycheck .
Employers are always searching for quality employees from the labor force . Offering employer sponsored qualified retirement plans can be a significant recruiting and retention feature of the company . A popular choice of employer sponsored retirement plans are defined contribution retirement plans . Some employers match a percentage of the employee 's contribution to enhance the retirement benefit .
In all consumer condor , purchasing participating whole life for permanent coverage is too expensive when compared to the less expensive guaranteed universal life . That being said , participating whole life may be an excellent alternative for long term savers looking for future tax advantaged retirement income . The policy can be enhanced with a term and PUA rider to maximize cash values .
Cash balance plans are qualified defined benefit plans under ERISA , the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . Employers appreciate the discriminatory ability to favor business owners . Cash balance plans are also used in tandem with 401 -LRB- k -RRB- for enhanced contribution limits . The plans accumulate tax deferred and offer creditor protection .
Assuming the phrase terminal bonus means terminal dividend , here is a basic explanation . Participating whole life insurance generally declares an annual dividend . But when a participating whole life policy is surrendered , reserves are freed up and the surrender cash value are enhanced .
There are several qualified defined benefit and contribution retirement plans that are employer sponsored . The most popular is a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- defined contribution plan under ERISA , Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . The pretax contributions accumulate tax deferred and some employers match a portion of the employee 's contribution , further enhancing the overall benefit .
The best homeowners insurance is the policy with the most coverage options available . I recommend an HO5 policy for your home . Many carriers will have enhancements that may be offered to the HO5 that can significantly broaden your coverage 's . I suggest you sit down and talk to a local independent agent about coverage 's available in your area .
Health insurance does not generally cover cosmetic surgery , so if the reason for the implant isjust breast enhancement then no it would not usually be covered . If the reason for the implant is reconstructive in nature due to a covered illness or accident then the implants may be covered .
There are no additional brownie points for purchasing life insurance to enhance your credit score . On the other hand , your credit score could affect the premium youll pay for your life insurance . Its important to disclose , a less the stellar credit score , to youre an independent life insurance agent . Most seasoned , independent life insurance agents know who the benevolent insurance companies are based on your credit score .
Medicare isa national social program administered by the U.S. government thatguaranteeshealth care coverageto allAmericans who have worked in the U.S. long enough to earn coverage . Medicare will generally cover80 % ofyour medical cost . Humana offers enhancements to the government 's coverage either with a Medigap plan which can cover the additional 20 % that Medicare does n't pay or a Medicare Advantage plan that covers all that Medicare covers with added benefits .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Washington Tax Life Insurance Benefits ?
Normally no life insurance proceeds would not be taxed , however Washington state does have a state estate tax . The exemption is $ 1,000,000 meaning any amount over this amount could be subject to estate taxes . The top marginal tax rate for the state estate tax in Washington is 16 % .
Does Washington state tax life insurance benefits ? Short answer `` yes '' in some situations . Washington state does have their own version of estate taxes , just like the federal government does . The threshold is much lower than the Federal level and the highest bracket is much lower than the Federal standard . To reduce or minimize the impact of ownership of a life policy if someone is in that higher asset bracket , a life insurance trust should be considered to help in this area .
The state of Washington does not charge income tax on life insurance benefits left to a person as beneficiary . If the benefit is left to the estate , or no beneficiary is alive , the money will be taxed . Life insurance proceeds are considered part of the estate , and state and federal estate taxes apply to the excess above the amount of the estate that is exempted from estate taxes . In 2013 , the amount of the estate exempt from federal estate taxes is $ 5,250,000 .
Generally , the answer is no . That 's one of the best benefits of life insurancethe death benefit is tax-free . Make sure the beneficiary is something different than the estate of the policy holder . That 's when the state can come in and get their hands on your money from a tax perspective . Consulting with a licensed life advisor on the day you bought the policy was importantbut not as important to an ongoing consultative relationship with an agent when you need them the most .
Does Washington state tax life insurance benefits ? Short answer `` yes '' in some situations . Washington state does have their own version of estate taxes , just like the federal government does . The threshold is much lower than the Federal level and the highest bracket is much lower than the Federal standard . To reduce or minimize the impact of ownership of a life policy if someone is in that higher asset bracket , a life insurance trust should be considered to help in this area .
Normally no life insurance proceeds would not be taxed , however Washington state does have a state estate tax . The exemption is $ 1,000,000 meaning any amount over this amount could be subject to estate taxes . The top marginal tax rate for the state estate tax in Washington is 16 % .
What are the best health insurance plans in Washington ? Well the ones I offer of course ! ;-RRB- Washington state has a pretty limited selection of health insurance providers because of how our insurance laws have been set up . A lot of the things coming to the rest of the country with Obamacare , residents of Washington have had since around 2000 . The changes coming with the new healthcare laws will not have as dramatic effect here than elsewhere . The cost of health insurance in Washington is high , because the requirements to market it are very tight and you have to be in compliance to sell your product for any state you do business in . That said , health insurance is very safe in Washington , the risk of failure is very low because the standards are very high .
Probably the easiest way to find out is visit the Office of the Insurance Commissioner 's website WEBSITELINK There you can look up any company you may be interested in and find if they are authorized to sell in Washington state . You can also check for complaints or any compliance issues the company has faced . One thing with Washington State and insurance is that approval for sale is on a plan by plan basis , not company by company . An insurance company may have 5 of their 10 offerings approved for sale in Washington , but 5 may not me . Certain types of insurance products are not to be sold in Washington as they do not meet state requirements .
The cost associated with health insurance in Washington state is dependent a couple different factors . Depending on your income you may find it better to apply through the Washington Health Plan Finder website -LRB- the Washington State Exchange -RRB- , you can also apply off the exchange . Next are these factors age , smoker / non-smoker , and for some carriers what county you live in -LRB- some carriers are not available in all counties in Washington -RRB- . Next you will want to find a plan that your doctor -LRB- s -RRB- accepts as well as your preferred choice of hospital . After narrowing it down using that criteria , you should have a handful of plans that will be available to you .
The state of Washington does not charge income tax on life insurance benefits left to a person as beneficiary . If the benefit is left to the estate , or no beneficiary is alive , the money will be taxed . Life insurance proceeds are considered part of the estate , and state and federal estate taxes apply to the excess above the amount of the estate that is exempted from estate taxes . In 2013 , the amount of the estate exempt from federal estate taxes is $ 5,250,000 .
Does an employer have to offer life insurance in Washington State ? Short answer `` NO '' . Life insurance is not a requirement as health insurance is . Most employers offer some life insurance as it usually comes bundled with medical plans . Employers also get a tax write off on the cost of 50k coverage as an incentive to provide some life insurance .
For most people Life Insurance is used to provide a DEATH BENEFIT to families once the insured passes away . The money can be used for funeral expenses , providing income to families once the insured has passed , paying for children 's college education ... One of the BIGGEST SECRETS that Washington and Wall Street do not want you to know is the LIVING BENEFITS that are provided by life insurance . Did you know that a life insurance policy can provide you with TAX FREE INCOME for the rest of your life ? To learn more about life insurance or ask questions related to your specific needs simply visit me at WEBSITELINK
Health Insurance rates change from insurance company to insurance company and State to State . Each insurance company must submit rates to their respective state insurance commissioner for approval . Some companies charge higher rates for smokers . Since the ACA came into effect an insurance company can no longer deny someone due to their health . ACA also permits a person to change plans off Open Enrollment if their income increases or decreases . Some States offer State run insurance options inside a State based exchange such as Washington and some are using the new ACA Federal Site . Rates are based on age so the younger you are the less you will pay ... and some insurance companies even base rates on smoking or non-smoking , as stated above . If you are in a State that offers a State based exchange you may apply through the exchange to see if you qualify for a Tax Credit -LRB- premium reduction -RRB- and/or a Cost Sharing reduction -LRB- lower Deductible , Co-Insurance , Max OOP , or Co-pays . Or you can choose to purchase direct through an insurance company if you do not wish to receive a Tax Credit or Cost Sharing reduction . You can only apply during Open Enrollment which for most states is Nov 15 , 2014 - Feb 15 , 2015 for the 2015 tax year , UNLESS you have a Qualifying Event . 2016 tax year Open Enrollment will be Nov 7 - Dec 15th , 2015 . A Qualifying Event is something that changes your status such as a Divorce , Marriage , Adoption , Birth , Loss of Job , COBRA Ends , etc. . So , all this to say that you will need to check with your State to find rates or use my site to compare rates for your State if your State is using the Federal Exchange for 2015 . I will list my site link on here in my next post . Stay tuned ! Or contact me at 971-327-5792 requesting rate information .
Peoples Benefit Life Insurance Company -LRB- sometimes called People 's Life Insurance Company of Washington , DC -RRB- merged with Monumental Life Insurance Company on October 1 , 2007 . Monumental Life is licensed in 49 states -LRB- all except New York -RRB- and is also licensed in the Distric of Columbia . Monumental Life is part of the Transamerica Agency Network and the AEGON Insurance Group .
How does life insurance help you ? Great question ! Besides the obvious answer given by most agents of `` It gives your family the resources they need to take care of things AFTER you pass away ... '' there are some even better and less morbid answers . -LRB- sorry about killing you just now , I promise not to do it again -RRB- Life Insurance is one of the best kept secrets -LRB- do you trust Washington & Wall Street ? - us either -RRB- when it comes to retirement planning . Here at Safe Money Solutions LLC we help families create TAX FREE INCOME that they can never outlive using a specially designed life insurance policy . While we do earn less money in commissions creating these policies , we sleep easy knowing we have given individuals and families the peace of mind that they will have income they can count on in retirement . PLUS the best news is your money IS NOT in the market !!! learn more at WEBSITELINK
Yes , Fidelity sells life insurance through Fidelity Life Association . The company was established in 1896 as a fraternal benefit society in the state of Illinois . They are licensed to sell life insurance in all the states except Washington and New York . They sell to both individuals and groups . Their products include Term , Universal , and Whole Life Insurance , many of which do not require an exam .
How to find health insurance ? Well if you 're in Washington state I hope it would be by contacting my office . Basically the best way to find health insurance is to work with an agent . Working with an agent does n't effect your cost and usually will help with your headaches in finding coverage .
Hope your son is getting better ! In Washington State , we have a mandatory coverage called Personal Injury Protection . This provides medical coverage for the driver and all passengers in case of an accident . A waiver needs to be signed if the client does not want this coverage . Most insurance companies should have a similar coverage -LRB- might be called something different depending on state/company -RRB- . This coverage also covers the named insured -LRB- owner of the policy -RRB- as a pedestrian if they are hit by a car .
A number of companies offer Cancer plans . To name a few , Standard Life and Accident , Bankers Fidelity , Bankers Life , Washington National , Sterling Life , and many more . If you are looking for a cancer plan call a good independent life insuance agent who can help you find a good plan that fits your needs and budget .
Guardian Life Insurance Company of America is a mutual company based in New York City , New York . They also have regional offices all across the northern states , from Washington to New York . Rated A + + by AM Best , Guardian Life Insurance Company has several subsidiaries , including Berkshire Life Insurance Company of America .
end question
start question
annuities
How Are Annuities Structured ?
An annuity converts a sum of money into a lifetime stream of income . The Internal Revenue Code allows money accumulated in an annuity to defer income tax . These two features have given rise to many alterations that meet the specific needs of certain people . Some annuities have become amazingly complex .
Annuities can be categorized into two types : deferred and immediate . Immediate annuities provide income and can have a future date to begin distributions , including life time income you cant outlive . Deferred annuities accumulate tax deferred , a tax advantaged feature for long term annuities . Deferred annuities can offer fixed interest , indices -LRB- both domestic and foreign -RRB- and separate sub accounts featuring access to market equities and bonds -LRB- variable annuities , a security . -RRB-
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The main risk people face with fixed annuities is the buying power of the payments you receive because they do not have a cost of living adjustment -LRB- COLA -RRB- built in . Annuities offering COLAs are available , but generally require a higher premium to account for the increase in payments . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! As annuities are an insurance product , there is the ability to structure your annuity to allow the remaining balance to pass to a beneficiary . Depending upon how you structure it , you can have your annuity pay for a certain number of years and run out ; pay until you pass , then continue to pay your spouse ; or pay the remainder to a beneficiary when you and your spouse have passed . That amount can be structured as a lump sum , -LRB- taxes ! -RRB- or a series of payments -LRB- lesser chunk of taxes -RRB- . Ask your agent to walk you through the options , ok ? Thanks for asking !
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
That is a great question ! The answer depends upon the annuity itself , and how you structured it . -LRB- Or will structure it , if you are thinking of buying one -RRB- Some annuities will be structured to pay out up to your death , and then cease payments . Whatever was left in that fund reverts back to the insurance company . Others will then make payments to your surviving spouse , and cease when they pass . You can also have one where the funds pass to a beneficiary , either in a lump sum , or in payments . There are a lot of options , and some will cost you extra . Please check with your advisor , or agent , and determine what is best for you . Thanks for asking !
A Group Annuity Retirement Plan is exactly what it means , providing a retirement plan , using an annuity structure which generally has several options to choose from similar to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan . The difference is depending on how the annuity is structured , you may have guarantees of not losing any of your principle .
Annuities work by the insurance company taking your premium in a lump sum or series of payments , investing it , and crediting you with a fixed and/or variable interest rate during what is called the accumulation period . The insurance company then pays the premium and interest back out to you in payment installments during what is called the annuity period . These annuity payments to you can be for a set period of time or for life . Annuities do not have medical requirements , are flexible due to having many options in how they are structured , and the growth in an annuity is generally tax deferred until it is payed out during the annuity period .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
Most homeowners policies include coverage for other structures . Other structures typically are defined small buildings on your property like sheds . The amount of coverage can vary but many carriers provide up to ten percent of the homes coverage value for these . If you have a structure that is of higher value then you may wish to have an endorsement added to your policy to provide the proper level of coverage for the structure .
Are you kidding me ? You can say that for all individuals from all income levels , with different concerns that a term policy or a spousal trust would always be a better option ? First of all anyone who qualifies any insurance policy structuring by referencing the total population of current and potential policy holders and does not give you a mixed message then they do not fully understand or do not care to fully answer the question as to the benefits or drawbacks of a policy -LRB- assuming that they are not basing their statement in the fact that the policy structuring will be eliminated/or significantly compromised by federal regulations -RRB- . First of all I am including Indexed Universal Life under the whole life product line , some professionals like to clearly separate the different options , which can serve a purpose . However I will assume a limited working knowledge of life insurance structuring regarding the average consumer who would be asking this as the first question that they would like to address once they take a seat in ones office . That being said most people who have not been educated or taught themselves the life insurance market are only familiar with Term and Whole . At very least it is a good place to start as those looking for final expense plans have no interest and are not going to benefit from hearing about all of the whole life policy structurings , and a individual who is trying to figure out how they can reduce estate taxes , avoid taxes for surpassing federal and possible state gifting limits they do n't have any interest in term life and are probably going to be using life insurance along with setting up a or several trusts to help them meet their need . If you already have a standard whole life policy and your goal when purchasing the policy was maximizing distributions to beneficiaries than I would say that the majority of policy holders that fit into that criteria would be best off leveraging the equity in their policy to meet their `` borrowing '' needs . This is also assuming that the policy has been in force long enough to establish a respectable cash value -LRB- depending on the policy , the premiums paid and the interest rates a rough estimate would be 8 years from the policy issue before you would consider borrowing from the policy except for in a emergency -RRB- . Basically the most efficient way to borrow from such a policy would be using the cash value in the policy as collateral -LRB- as you would a car or a house -RRB- on a bank loan . This will give you the most options to shop around for the best interest rates and will simplify the entire process for you . Right now Indexed Universal Life policies are dominating the market . They can be a little more complex and confusing . However they are seeing such widespread growth because of their interest rate structuring , and because they serve as fantastic duel purpose policies . By purchasing a policy with a face amount that is appropriate for your needs but far less then you had initially had in mind the policy will accumulate a significant cash value that can be used as a college fund , a retirement fund , or many other situations . One would generally want to plan on contributing to the policy for a specific amount of time before they will be requiring the distributions . But the amount of time you will want to give the policy to grow the cash value will depend on your needs , if you want to use if to provide a extra $ 40,000 annually to supplement your post retirement stream financial goals for 20 years then it will probably have to grow for about 25 years . If on the other hand you are just looking to find the most beneficial way to structure a college fund that will only be making distributions for 4-6 years then one can achieve this in a far smaller time frame , by the way I personally have funded my daughters higher expense costs from a IUL policy and I think that they are very often the best option , a professional with your best interest motivating their actions will always look into the options run calculations and then present you with your options and empirically show evidence that supports their value statement and product comparison . That 's all I am going to say except if one does not believe in cash value policies then what do they purpose as a better way to maximize transfers of wealth . - Christopher J. Lawrence Christopher@Lawrence-Financial-Consulting.com
The term ` Dwelling Extension ' in a homeowner policy is also commonly expressed as ` Other Structures ' . The amount of property insurance listed under Coverage B on your policy is usually 10 % of the amount of insurance you have chosen for the main structure - Coverage A . The Dwelling Extension or Other Structures feature covers all structures that are are either attached to your home , as with a connected garage or otherwise situated on the property , such as separate storage shed , gazebo , etc. . The 10 % can be increased based upon your needs .
Secondary market annuities offer fixed term payment streams from top quality insurance carriers . The high quality creditworthiness of the insurance carriers usually translates to lower returns to the investor , however secondary market annuities come with yields one to four percent higher than comparable assets . The term secondary market annuity has become an industry standard referring to a factored structured settlement , previously owned annuity or in-force annuity . Secondary market annuities offer all the benefits of the primary market , period certain , guaranteed yield annuity.Simply put , secondary market annuities offer higher returns without additional risk . Hope this Helps Tyson Wright SMA Hub , Inc. .
That is a great question ! The definition of an annuity is '' any stream of payments that has a fixed total . '' When we use the word in our financial word , we are referring to an investment vehicle designed for providing a long lasting income stream . They are offered by insurance companies and other financial institutions , and are used to fund retirements , grants and trusts . Here 's a very simple description of how an annuity works : They are funded by a deposit , which then sits for a number of years gathering interest . After that period of time , the annuity begins paying out a set amount until either it runs out , the owner dies , or the owners spouse dies , depending upon how the annuity is structured . It guarantees that there will be an income that lasts as long as you do . Because they require that the deposit sit untouched for many years , an annuity may not be a good investment for some people . That deposit money can be taken out , but there are very costly penalties . As a result , regulations require that the seller sit down with you first and do what is called a `` suitability study . '' They will go over your financial situation , your retirement plans , and your goals . If it is found to not be `` suitable '' for you , they can not sell you one . This protects folks that may have need for that cash from being trapped into a losing investment . I hope that answers your question for you , if you 'd like more detail , I 'd be happy to help , feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
An annuity is a contract between you -LRB- the annuitant -RRB- and the insurance company -RRB- . Fixed annuities are a type of annuity that has a defined , guaranteed payment structure . The annuitant agrees to pay the insurance company a single payment , or a series of payments , and the insurance company agrees to pay you a fixed amount -LRB- income -RRB- , starting immediately -LRB- an immediate annuity -RRB- or at a later date -LRB- a deferred annuity -RRB- , for a specified time period -LRB- this could be for 10 years , 15 , years , 20 years , for life , etc. -RRB- . You generally want to have the annuity through a financially sound company -LRB- e.g. `` A '' rated or higher by rating companies such as A.M. Best , Moody 's , etc. -RRB- . If you 're concerned about what would happen to your money if the annuity insurer went bankrupt , please be aware there are protections in place in case something like that happened . In each state , insurance companies are required to pay into a state-operated guaranty fund that , in short , acts like an insurance company for the insurance company . It can pay out funds to the beneficiaries of the annuities up to the funds specified maximum allowances . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Damage to a structure from termites , ants and insects in general is not covered under the standard homeowner insurance policy . The underlying theory is that such damage is the result of infestation due to negligence on the part of the homeowner as the proximate cause of the occurrence . The homeowner is obligated to inspect for such damage and remedy the situation accordingly . Homeowner insurance covers structural damage that is sudden and accidental in nature . Infestation does not fit these criteria . Check with a qualified -LRB- recommended -RRB- and fully licensed pest control operation in your area . You may be able to purchase a policy or bond that would cover you for certain types of infestation after they have inspected and possibly treated your residence structure . We are talking about structural damages here . There could be coverage for damages that might occur from a roof collapse , for example , resulting from the infestation , that causes loss to other property within the dwelling . However , the infestation damage itself is not covered .
This is more commonly known as a survivorship universal life -LRB- SUL -RRB- insurance policy - it 's different from an individual universal life insurance policy in that the policy insures the lives of two people -LRB- usually a husband and wife -RRB- . The policy proceeds are only paid out upon the death of the second insured . Many people use this type of policy for estate planning purposes . If your mother can not continue to make premium payments or does not want to , she can surrender the policy and take out the cash value -LRB- less any surrender charges , outstanding loans , or interest , if applicable -RRB- . There is also the option to let it run out on it 's own . When you no longer contribute premiums to the policy , it will steadily use up the cash value in the policy to continue the coverage until there is nothing left , at which the point the policy would `` crash '' on it 's own and no longer provide coverage . The third option is to change the structure of the policy . You may have the option to reduce the face amount of the policy -LRB- the death benefit -RRB- or reduce the length of coverage to lower the premiums to make the policy more affordable if cost is a concern . I would suggest your mother contact the agent on the policy and ask them to run midstreams to find out what the current values are on the policy , how long the coverage will go for on the guaranteed side and current assumption side of the program and what changes would it make to the policy given the above options . This will provide a good indication as to what course of action would be most appropriate . Guaranteed side means how long will the coverage be guaranteed for at the absolute minimum with a given program structure . Current assumption side means how long will the coverage go for given today 's values .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will Health Insurance Cover A Breast Pump ?
The answer to your question may vary from company to company . Some companies may pay in full while some will only cover a portion . On your membership card there should be a `` customer service '' number . You should call them and ask them . You will need to give them your identifying information and your policy number as they have to make sure you have the right to request information
The Affordable Care Act requires that breast pumps be covered with no copay , but not all insurance plans are required to be compliant . Most plans require you use their provider , and only cover a specific pump . If you want a different pump , some companies will allow you to purchase a different pump if you pay the difference . You will ultimately have to check with your insurance company to see their specific coverage .
Prior to January 1 , 2013 the most likely answer to your question would have been no . Though , in group health insurance there might have been contracts , especially for some self-insured groups , where coverage for a breast pump might have been covered . One of the earlier provisions of the Affordable Care Act does require coverage for lactation services of which a breast pump is certainly a part of and therefore is technically covered . The law however does not specify any particular types or models of breast pumps that must be covered so the consumer should be aware that availability of breast pumps and the types and models that are covered will vary from one insurance carrier to another depending upon their internal policies regarding such durable medical equipment items . I advise that you check with your insurance carrier regarding their specific benefits for this service as they will probably have preferred vendors that they will want their members to purchase or rent these devices from and they will be able to inform you as to specifically what types or models of devices your policy with them will cover . Going out and buying a breast pump and then just filing a claim with your insurance carrier might result in a denial of the claim or a reduced level of coverage if your purchase was not within their guidelines .
Breast pumps are a convenience item , and not medically necessary . Health insurance is designed to cover expensive treatment that is considered a medical necessity . Health insurance does not cover many over the counter items , especially if they are not purposed to treat injury or a medical illness . Breast pumps are not covered by health insurance .
Recent healthcare legislation -LRB- commonly known as Obamacare or The Affordable Care Act -RRB- has greatly increased covered preventive services . Equipment , services and counseling are often some of the newer benefits and breast-feeding seems to be heavily promoted . However , it seems as if some policies cover only basic manual pumps while other plans cover hospital-grade pumps . It 's best to ask your broker who can promptly examine your policy . Or you can contact an experienced broker who will discuss which carriers offer the best breast pump coverage in your area .
The Affordable Care Act requires that breast pumps be covered with no copay , but not all insurance plans are required to be compliant . Most plans require you use their provider , and only cover a specific pump . If you want a different pump , some companies will allow you to purchase a different pump if you pay the difference . You will ultimately have to check with your insurance company to see their specific coverage .
Check with your company but I would say no in most cases . Breast Pumps are not a medically necessary item , they are more of a convenience and really not that expensive anyway . If there is a medical necessity then it is possible your company would approve the breast pump .
Under the new Affordable Care Act provisions , equipment for breast-feeding is often covered . But mechanical equipment coverage seems a bit murky . It may be best to contact your current insurer and describe the type of breast pump you have . They should be able to advise you if it is covered . Breast ... , I mean , best of luck to you .
Yes ! Some will . My wife and I just had our Daughter six weeks ago and her group UnitedHealthCare plan through her employer paid in full for a top-of-the-line Modela breast pump . I do n't want to mislead anyone so before getting the pump , contact the benefits verification department of your carrier or administrator and find out if your plan covers the pump . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
Breast pumps are usually over the counter items and are not medically necessary therefore most health insurance will not cover them . Unless there is sound medical reason for any type of device or medical equipment , then health insurance will not cover them If you feel your case is unusual then have your doctor contact your company for approval .
In 2014 , The Affordable Care Act will increase the preventive coverage that must be provided on health insurance plans . Breast-feeding counseling and presumably education will be covered . Coverage on the actual pump seems to vary.It is best to contact your broker that represents the policy and he/she can quickly determine benefits .
There is usually some type of life insurance policy you can get after being diagnosed with breast cancer . If you get a policy that covers you , either after disclosing that you have breast cancer , or because they did not ask -LRB- i.e. guaranteed issue life insurance -RRB- , yes , it will cover death from breast cancer or any other illness or accident . If you got a life insurance policy before having any idea that you were going to be diagnosed with breast cancer , the policy also will cover death due to breast cancer . We hope that the breast cancer never results in death . But if it did , you would be covered .
Medicare will pay for breast reconstruction to repair the breast after injury , to improve the function of the breast , or to reconstruct one of both breasts after a mastectomy . Medicare will also cover the post surgery brassiere . This applies to elective -LRB- prophylactic -RRB- mastectomy for those with strong genetic markers to get breast cancer , as well as those who had the mastectomy as treatment for breast cancer .
Yes , Medicare does cover insulin pump supplies under Medicare Part B . If the Medicare patient uses syringes or pen for diabetes , rather than a pump , those supplies are not covered by Part B but are covered by Part D . The diabetic person using the insulin pump must have type 1 diabetes , or hard to control type 2 or gestational diabetes .
The loss of the pump to normal wear and tear is not covered . If the pump is lost due to a covered peril such as lightning , fire , or windstorm , then it would be covered . A pump is not an excluded item under the HO-3 form of the homeowners policy which is the most common form .
It is highly unlikely that a breast lift would be covered as such a procedure is generally considered cosmetic in nature . For such a procedure to be approved medical necessity would have to be demonstrated . There are some circumstances where back/neck/shoulder problems can be traced to very enlarged breasts and a case for medical necessity for breast reduction surgery has successfully been made . But , if you are just losing the battle with time and gravity you should not expect a breast lift to be covered by your health insurance .
Critical Illness Insurance will usually cover breast cancer , but it may not cover masses in the breast that are in situ or stage 1 cancer -LRB- or may pay less for breast cancer in the lower stages -RRB- . Review your particular policy regarding their guidelines for breast cancer before purchasing your critical illness insurance policy .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . An exception to this to have insulin covered under Part B is when insulin is administered via a medically necessary insulin pump - under this scenario , an external insulin pump and the insulin may be covered as durable medical equipment . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . If you 're looking for a Medigap plan or are interested in seeing if a lower rate is available compared to your existing plan -LRB- Medigap plans are standardized -RRB- , please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Breast augmentation is generally considered a cosmetic procdure and not a medically necessary procedure , therefore , it is usually not covered . Breast reduction can be considered medically necessary and covered by health insurance if the breasts are causing back and neck issues . If it is considered medically necessary the surgery is covered once a woman is 18 years old and an adult .
When breast reconstruction is merely for cosmetic reasons the procedure is not considered medically necessary and would not be covered . Breast reconstruction surgery is normally covered by Medicare following cancer treatment that includes a radical mastectomy . In some cases Medicare may cover breast reduction and reconstruction when the surgery is done out of medical necessity .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Will I Have To Pay For Health Insurance Under Obamacare ?
Depends on the `` metal '' level of the plans you 're looking at , your age , which carrier 's plans are available in your area , and whether you use tobacco products or not . These are the most common factors that go into rate calculations for quotes . You should work with an independent health insurance agent/broker to see what 's available for you - agents & brokers have the knowledge to help determine which program is going to be most suitable for your needs and your budget .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
Will you have to buy health insurance under Obamacare ? Yes , you are expected to . If you choose not to , you will pay a nominal fine each year . So what you have to weigh is the cost of a small fine each year vs the much higher costs of the premium . So you can go without if you choose and just pay the penalty to the government and then upon illness , sign up for coverage as their will be no pre-ex to worry about . I expect a lot of people to use health insurance under Obamacare much like a trolley , hop on when you want , hop off when you want .
Obamacare is working well in California . Obamacare was intended to help Americans who could not previously afford health insurance get insured . People with bad health -LRB- heart disease , obesity , cancer -RRB- often were denied coverage or charged a very high premium . Now these folks are charged the same rate as everyone else . People with low income were often priced out of the insurance market as well . It was not reasonable to expect a person making $ 25,000 a year to spend 15 % of their income on health insurance . Under ObamaCare people making under $ 48,000 per year are eligible for premium assistance . WEBSITELINK - In this video I show you how a 30 year old earning $ 25,000 per year can get a policy for just $ 18 per month .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
No , not really . If you are talking about the individual health insurance market then your freedom of movement has been severely restricted by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . So , outside of the annual open enrollment period each year you can only change your health insurance coverage if you experience a change of life status event or special election period as defined under ObamaCare . Some examples are getting married or divorced , having a child or moving to another state or outside your current carrier 's service area in your state . Similar restrictions apply if you are covered under a group health plan that offers multiple options or one of the new private health insurance exchanges that some companies are moving to . An increasingly common situation that many consumers are being or will be faced with is finding out that their favorite physician is no longer participating in the provider network of the health insurance plan they enrolled in . Cancelling your coverage to switch to a new insurance carrier in mid-year that does have your doctor as an in-network provider wo n't meet the criteria for a change of life status event or a special election period . You could cancel your old coverage but you would have to wait until the next open enrollment period and the first of the year to get new individual health insurance . Failure to pay your monthly insurance premium is also not a qualifying event and can leave you out in the cold until the next enrollment period so do n't think about that as a strategy to change insurance carriers in mid-stream . While this was tied into a continuation of coverage under COBRA issue , I recently witnessed a heartbreaking example of this situation . I received a frantic call from the girlfriend of a man who has terminal cancer . At first she was unsure as to his last day of being covered under his employer 's plan and whether he had continued his coverage under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . In fact , the initial information she gave me was that he had not continued his group coverage and was still within the 60-day window that a person has to purchase individual coverage after losing their employer based coverage . If this had been the case , even though the man was being treated for terminal cancer I would have been able to enroll him in major medical coverage that would have had to cover his care immediately . After digging into this man 's situation more deeply we discovered that he had elected to continue his coverage under his former employer 's plan , had paid the first month 's premium by check but had then failed to make his second month 's premium payment and had his COBRA coverage cancelled due to non-payment . The fact that this man was undergoing intensive chemo & radiation therapy and being given massive doses of pain medications made it understandable as to how he missed making that second premium payment but that did n't stop the COBRA plan administrator from terminating him for non-payment . Unfortunately , as cancellation of coverage for non-payment of premium is not a qualifying event the individual major medical carriers were within their rights to decline him for coverage until the next open enrollment period and coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . This has left the man uninsured at the worst possible time and has his friends and family raising money for his care . If he is still alive by the first of the year I 'll be able to get him coverage but his life expectancy is not that great but the bills he is accumulating are .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
No . ObamaCare is a name that has become attached to a law passed in 2010 called the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- , it is also sometimes referred to as the `` Affordable Care Act '' . This legislation was a centerpiece of the Obama administration 's political agenda and it significantly re-engineered the health insurance industry through such actions as making policies guaranteed to be issued , eliminating pre-existing condition exclusions and limitations , requiring that all policies cover certain `` Minimum Essential Benefits '' and creating Federal or State run health insurance marketplaces to facilitate the purchasing of health insurance and perhaps subsidizing the cost of health insurance policies for people below 400 % of the Federal Poverty Line . ObamaCare itself provides no health insurance coverage . That is still a function of health insurance companies now operating under the requirements of ObamaCare .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
There are multiple ways to get health insurance for you and your family and , depending on where you live , a wide array of options for health insurance coverage types and cost points . With the implementation of the ObamaCare requirements individual health insurance plans and costs have been transformed dramatically and the consumer needs to exercise great care in making their health plan selection . My first and best recommendation is to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is certified to sell health insurance coverage both on and off of the government health insurance marketplace in your state of residence . There can be much more involved in a health insurance plan than what a bullet points overview of the plan 's benefits are and its monthly premium . A knowledgeable health insurance agent can explain if a given plan covers you if you go outside its network , if it has a broad or a narrow pharmacy network , if the plan 's medical deductible applies per person covered or is aggregated for the family , and a whole lot of other things you should know before making your purchasing decision . Under ObamaCare if you purchase a health insurance plan you later learn you do n't like it 's not just a simple matter of cancelling your coverage and enrolling with another insurance carrier . So , buyer beware . If you and your family have income levels below 100 % or 138 % -LRB- depending upon the state you live in -RRB- of the Federal Poverty Level then you will qualify for coverage under your state 's Medicaid plan . In that event you need to contact your state government 's Medicaid office . Of course , there is the HealthCare.gov web site that you can go to and shop for coverage and enroll online . Quite frankly , while HealthCare.gov has improved somewhat over last year 's rocky start , I find most consumers still have a hard time truly understanding the information as it is presented on HealthCare.gov and they still need a knowledgeable person to explain the differences between various plan offerings and how to approach the subsidy process . Also , there are other online sites available , some with telephonic support to help answer a person 's questions . This can be kind of crap shoot though as you may or may not be talking to someone who understands the details of your particular location 's health plan options and they are n't doing much more than reading you a summary off of their own computer screen . So , remember , health insurance is still a very local product and varies from state to state and even within different areas within a state . You will be best served to deal with someone who is more locally based in most cases .
No . You are making the mistake that many people are making in thinking that ObamaCare is an insurance plan , it is not . ObamaCare or the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- as that is its true title -RRB- is a massive law accompanied by an even more massive set of administrative guidelines that set new rules for how health insurance plans are offered , priced , structured . Plus it did create the online government health insurance marketplaces -LRB- e.g. - HealthCare.gov -RRB- as a supposedly simpler way for people to purchase individual health insurance and possibly receive subsidies for the cost of their health insurance . ObamaCare is in no way a government health insurance program such as Medicaid or Medicare .
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
As with most everything in life , the best and the cheapest are rarely the same thing and you do tend to get what you pay for . The cheapest health insurance that meets the requirements under ObamaCare will have a very high deductible and have you paying for all health care services -LRB- except preventive care -RRB- out of your pocket until you have met that deductible that may be $ 6000 or more . If you never use any health care during the year then this would meet your criteria for being the cheapest and perhaps the best . The best heath insurance plans that meet the requirements under ObamaCare will provide you with reasonable copayments , a low deductible and relatively low out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure -LRB- maybe as low as several hundred or a thousand dollars -RRB- . However , these plans will have a significantly higher monthly premium . The true answer to your question is unique to each individual . You would be well served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you define your needs and budget and then find the best health insurance plan -LRB- either in the government marketplaces or outside them -RRB- that fits your needs .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
Let us begin by being clear on what ObamaCare is not . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- a.k.a. - ObamaCare -RRB- does not in itself provide insurance to anyone . ObamaCare is a bureaucratic & administrative structure that imposes requirements on the private health insurance system and , where accepted by state governments , expands the eligibility range for qualifying for Medicaid . It is funded through government appropriations channeled through several departments of the government -LRB- Health & Human Services , IRS , DOL , etc. -RRB- , a wide range of new taxes -LRB- tanning salons , medical devices , taxes on Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans , taxes on health insurance companies , increased Medicare Part A tax on high income wage earners are few examples -RRB- , changes to existing tax breaks -LRB- reducing the FSA deduction from $ 3500/yr to $ 2500/yr and eliminating the eligibility of over the counter drugs from coverage under FSA plans -RRB- , a $ 63 per employee per year fee assessed on group health insurance plans , the eventual employer mandate and individual mandate tax penalties for non-compliance , reductions in the amount of out of pocket medical expenses you can deduct from your personal income taxes -LRB- threshold increased from 7.5 % to 10 % of income to qualify for a deduction -RRB- , fees -LRB- insurance companies have to pay for the privilege of selling their products in the government marketplaces -RRB- , and $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over the next decade was shifted over to help fund Obamacare . This is not a total listing but hits many of the essential high points of where the money is supposed to be coming from .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A Veteran Get Life Insurance ?
A veteran who is no longer in active service can purchase the same life insurance as anyone else , based on age and health requirements . There is also military life insurance for veterans , but it has strict conditions -LRB- you can see those by searching on the word `` veteran '' on this website -RRB- .
Depending upon each life insurance companys definition of war or war exclusions as well as the status of military service , i.e. active , reserves or retired will determine the ability to secure life insurance coverage . However , with the exception of these disclaimers , you should be treated like other potential insured applying for life insurance .
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
In order to get VA Life insurance , someone must meet one these conditions : 1 -RRB- Have converted their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days after separating from the Service . This can be extended one year with a statement of good health . 2 -RRB- Have been given a VA rating for a new service related disability incurred in the past two years . This qualifies them for S-DVI -LRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Qualified for VMLI -LRB- Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance -RRB- by virtue of being a disabled veteran who was able to get an SAH grant .
There is life insurance for veterans provided by the VA called VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be purchased shortly after separation from the service . If getting a private policy , a veteran can get any life insurance policy that anyone else can get , as long and age and health guidelines are met .
The requirements for receiving VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance recently changed -RRB- . For those retiring from the service before Nov 1 , 2012 , you must apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . At this point in time , you will need to answer some health questions to be eligible to get the policy . You also need to have been on SGLI while you served , in order to qualify for VGLI . If you retired after Nov 1 , 2012 . you have 240 days to apply for VGLI without answering health questions . If you miss that deadline , you can get VGLI with evidence of good health if you apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . Again , you must be on SGLI at the time you left the service , in order to qualify for VGLI . Others who can get VGLI are the Individual Ready Reserve or Inactive National Guard . If you do not fit any of these categories , or do not wish to go that route , veterans can get an individual policy from private companies . Some of the health conditions that , unfortunately , can hit veterans disproportionately high are hepatitis , PTSD , diabetes , and others . Going to a company that specializes in any health conditions you might have will be a big help .
A veteran needs Long Term Care Insurance if he/she does not want to utilize long term health care provided by the Veterans Administration . This may be due to location or some other bias the veteran has about receiving VA medical care . Or a veteran might want Long Term Care Insurance in case he/she can not qualify for full benefits or full compensation for care offered by the VA. .
A veteran who is no longer in active service can purchase the same life insurance as anyone else , based on age and health requirements . There is also military life insurance for veterans , but it has strict conditions -LRB- you can see those by searching on the word `` veteran '' on this website -RRB- .
The VA does offer life insurance for Veterans , but there are narrow guidelines as to who can get it . If you are currently retiring from active service , you must apply to change your SGLI to VGLI within 120 days -LRB- you can wait one year longer with evidence of good health -RRB- . You can also get Veterans Group Life Insurance if you are a member of the Individual Ready Reserve or Inactive National Guard , or were disabled as a result of such service .
If you have a health condition that makes it difficult to get life insurance elsewhere , you have recently separated from the service , and are eligible to get Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- without having to answer medical questions , I think VGLI is a very good deal . If you are very healthy and able to get similar rates elsewhere , I would advise to lock in your premium for a longer period of time than Veterans Group Life Insurance locks them in . However , since the rate reduction in 2008 , VGLI premiums are good and it may be hard to beat them . You might want to purchase a permanent policy elsewhere along with taking VGLI Term to cover all your life insurance bases .
Unless a service person gets Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- within a year from separating from the service , their Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- will end and they will need to get a private policy . Contact an agency or website that carries several products to choose from to find the best rate for Veteran 's life insurance .
When servicemembers separate from the service , they have the opportunity to convert their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be done within a short time . If a veteran is looking for life insurance after some years of being out of the service , there is not a VA policy especially for them , but they can get private life insurance as can anyone of that age group .
Unfortunately , veterans do not get any life insurance unless they have met certain conditions . These are the major ones : 1 -RRB- Before Nov , 2012 - You must have been receiving SGLI and applied for VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days of separating from the service , or you have a year and 120 days to apply if you can show good health . 2 -RRB- After Nov , 2012 - Same as above but substitute 240 days for 120 days 3 -RRB- You are a member of the Individual Ready Reserve Unit or Inactive National Guard . If you are eligible for VGLI you can get up to $ 400,000 or the amount that you had in SGLI , whichever is lower .
To apply for Veterans Life Insurance , you can go to the benefits.va.gov website . However , keep in mind that you must apply for VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- shortly after departing from the service . You are only qualified for VGLI by converting SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to it within a certain time frame .
Unfortunately , Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is a lifetime renewable Term policy without cash value . Therefore , you would not be able to borrow from Veterans Group Life Insurance because it does not have any cash value or pay any dividends .
It is a challenge to come up with the money to bury someone who does not have life insurance or cash saved up for that event . Even with good intentions , savings can become depleted , putting family and friends in a difficult position . Most of the clients we 've had who have been involved in that type of situation , said they have taken up a collection among the family to bury their deceased relative . However , there are a few sources where you can help supplement funeral and burial costs . Social Security will pay a lump sum of $ 255 for a funeral if the deceased person qualified for SS benefits . Veterans can be buried for free in one of the nation 's 131 national cemeteries , and there are burial funds available for some eligible veterans . Read the criteria for receiving these benefits here : h WEBSITELINK Funeral homes like to be paid quickly , but you could reimburse those who donated after holding a sale of the deceased person 's belongings . Or perhaps memorials given could be applied toward the burial costs . Keep in mind that you can take out a policy on a parent , grandparent or other person for whom the costs of burial might fall on your shoulders . They just have to agree to and sign the policy . Perhaps if they understand the hardship being uninsured can put on their loved ones , they might consent to taking this step .
Im not sure if there is any free coverage . If there is it is a small amount . But all members of the military are eligible for subsidized coverage through the Department of Veterans Affairs . The program is called SGLI -LRB- Service-members Group Life Insurance -RRB- . It is super cheap and all members of the military should take advantage of it . It is a flat rate regardless of age/tobacco use/health . $ 400k costs $ 27/m When you retire you can convert it to the veterans group life plan . WEBSITELINK
As of June 1 , 2010 Medigap policies no longer can offer coverage for outpatient prescription drugs . Federal requlation requires that all Medicare beneficiaries have creditable prescription drug coverage . There are four ways to accomplish this : Drug coverage via an employer plan or retirement medical plan through a prior employer . Drug coverage via a Union retiree health plan . Veteran 's Administration -LRB- VA -RRB- drug coverage , available to certain veterans . A Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plan . All the best to you . Mark
The VA does not offer Disability Insurance . However , the Veterans Administration does pay monetary benefits to veterans who have disabilities that were caused or aggravated during active military service . The disability is rated on a scale of 1 to 10 and the compensation is adjusted according to the degree of disability .
The VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- requires that you receive care at their facilities and with their providers in order to receive VA benefits . Thus , the VA does not accept Medicare , as Medicare only works with Medicare approved facilities and providers . Many veterans use Medicare for their major medical expenses but use VA benefits to fill in the gaps . However , the VA drug plan covers more than Medicare Part D covers .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How To Determine Amount Of Renters Insurance ?
This is perceptive question , and the answer may surprise you . You should choose liability coverage first and it should exceed your net worth . If you have stocks , property , autos and other assets take the most liability coverage available . The second part is no less complicted , insure the property you own inside the rented building to the amount it would take to replace it . To do that you need to think in terms of a fire , and filling out a claims form . What will it cost toreplace your couch , or bed with like quality pieces . You probably need a record of either what you paid for the item or at a minimum an image of the piece itself . When you have done that , total your pieces and you then have the amount of property insurance you should purchase . Please do n't forget though that a lawsuit could be much more expensive than a fire so chose your liability coverage carefully .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
How to determine how much life insurance one needs is an exercise that all conscientious insurance agents go through with every client . It is a dereliction of duty not to do so . Of course once the need is determined it still remains up to the client how much to put in place . In determining the amount of insurance needed , of primary importance is to define what the goals are of the insured . If the main goal for the insurance is to provide for dependents then the requirements for that provision will be the main determining factor for the amount needed . If the main goal for the insurance is to provide additional income in retirement then that requirement will be the determining factor . So to answer your question depends on who the insurance is for . If it is for you , you should talk with an Insurance Adviser .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There are various deductibles in homeowner policies . The higher the chosen amount of the deductible , often between $ 100 and $ 1,000 or more in a typical homeowner policy , the lower the premium you should be paying . The amount you choose as your deductible is what you as a homeowner will absorb in the event of a covered loss . Once the amount of a covered loss is determined , the insurance carrier responds by paying the claim less the homeowner deductible . Generally you choose the amount of your deductible by determining the highest amount you are willing to pay on your own in the event of a covered loss . How much risk can you afford to hold ? Toward determining this , it is important to remember that you do not want to be submitting claims for small losses . A poor loss history will work against you in the long run . So , use that as another determining factor in the amount of your chosen deductible . Always ask your independent agent to help you with this process .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
A good amount of coverage for renters insurance is going to vary from individual to individual . Most carriers renters insurance policy 's start at 15000 . Your coverage amount should be high enough to pay for the replacement of your personal items . I would suggest using 10000 per direct family member as a bare minimum for base coverage amount . Contact a local agent and they can help you determine the amount of coverage that will work for you and your budget .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
There are a number of methods used to determine how much life insurance is needed . The simplest method is to multiply a person 's annual income by 10 . Another method is to determine how much income would be needed in the event of the insured 's death in order to maintain the lifestyle of the surviving immediate family including school tuition , etc. . Then based on a percentage of annual gain you feel you can count on by investing , determine the amount needed to invest in order to achieve that needed annual income , minus current liquid assets , and that 's the amount of insurance needed .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Can I Do To Plan For Retirement ?
Sit down with an advisor and get a game plan . Every person 's situation is different so you need an advisor that is going to take the time to look at the entire picture . I would recommend someone that has knowledge of how to file when it comes to Social Security , as this can cost you hundreds of thousands of dollars if done incorrectly . Advisors who offer this as a service will be few and far between , but they are out there . A good advisor will help with understanding your risk tolerance and place you in the correct investments to ensure the money you have lasts . This could be made up of stocks , bonds , mutual funds , annuities and life insurance . Yes , life insurance . Take the time to interview a few advisors in your area and make sure the appointment is about you and not the advisor .
What can I do to plan for retirement ? Get started saving , even if i 's passbook . Time is your biggest ally in retirement planning . More people waste that time trying to find the `` prefect '' retirement choice when really it is discovering the `` habit '' and `` discipline '' of saving money.Do not wait until you have found `` perfect '' , start saving , start learning and move funds from those saving into your different choices that you 've learned about . Is this a prefect plan ? No , it 's main goal is to get you saving money `` while '' you investigate your options .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Regardless of whether you are in you 50 's and are asking how do I start planning or if you are asking how do I plan on retiring when I am in my 50 's the process is the same . First determine what a successful retirement would look like for you . Once you have a basic outline then you can determine what needs to be done to fund it . The next step would be to work with a financial planner to calculate what needs to be done and how your resources should be allocated to make it happen . You will find addition information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
If you are asking how do youcalculate how much do you need to save for retirement there is a process to follow . First you need to determine what retirement success looks like to you . Your retirement planner may be trained to help you if not a lifestyle planner could . The next step to figure out what that lifestyle wouldcostand make a retirementbudget . Now you can do somemeaningfulcalculations . Total up what income you expect from any government plans , pensionplans , etc. . Compare this amount to your retirement lifestyle budget . The difference is what needs to be funded byadditionalsavings . There are calculators on the websites of financialinstitutionsto give you an idea . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
I should preface this by saying you should explore alternatives before you do surrender a retirement plan since in addition to lost savings there are tax consequences . In Canada , whether you can cash in you retirement plan depends on what type of plan you have . Individual Registered Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- can be surrendered . Group Pension Plans can not be surrendered while you are part of the plan . When you leave the plan whether you can access funds or are required to transfer to a locked in RRSP depends on a number of factors . It depends . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Retirement planning can be seem overwhelming since it involves so many different issues . The most difficult part for most is clarifying what do you want your retirement to look like . Travel , hobbies , charity work , new work ? The point is , once you have clarified your objectives , you can work on the `` financials '' . How much do you need to accumulate ? What vehicles work best ? What about tax ? If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
With financial planing , determining your objectives is the first step . Retirement planning is no different , it is a two part process . First you need to decide what a successful retirement would look like for you and then you need to plan how to fund it . What do you want to do in retirement ? Spend some time discussing this and writing down your objectives . One you have an outline , you can work with a financial planner to design a plan to accomplish your objectives . There is more information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
This best type of retirement plan is one that will fund the lifestyle you want to have in retirement , weather storms and not run out before you do . The first step is to decide what retirement success means to you and then calculate what is needed to fund it . The theory behind asset allocation is to mitigate risk by using difference asset classes . In retirement planning , product allocation is using the strengths and features of different products to mitigate risk . There is no one best product . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community.If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Does Aflac Offer Disability Insurance ?
To the best of my knowledge AFLAC does not offer a true disability policy . There policies are primarily supplemental , designed to pay in addition to any other coverage you may have . These policies are very good but are more limited than a true disability policy You might consider a combination of both disability insurance and a supplement to help pay for any elimination period or extra bills and lost wages you may incur .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
I will assume that your daughter is covered as a dependent under your AFLAC policy . AFLAC is not major medical health insurance , it is a supplement to major medical insurance designed to pay directly to the policyholder as opposed to a health care provider . AFLAC 's policies are designed to deal with specific types of situations such as a critical illness -LRB- which they spell out specifically what conditions qualify as a critical illness -RRB- , cancer , short term disability , hospital indemnity plans , accidents and life insurance . Other than the slight chance of a short term disability policy coming into play or some aspects of a hospital indemnity policy if your daughter was covered and met the contract terms for being hospitalized and/or disabled , I do not believe there will be circumstances where an AFLAC policy would pay out for a person diagnosed with Scoliosis .
No , Aflac does not offer a traditional Long Term Care Life Insurance product at this time . Aflac does carry a Critical Care and Recovery Insurance policy that would pay a cash benefit to the insured person if they were diagnosed with some serious , life impacting illnesses or health conditions as specified by the policy .
No . AFLAC is a supplementary insurance products insurance company that offers a variety of supplementary and voluntary insurance products . One of the products in their portfolio is a disability insurance product . But , AFLAC offers other lines of coverage such as accident policies , cancer policies , critical illness policies and life insurance policies .
AFLAC disability insurance is really no different than any other company 's disability policy when it comes to the rules of taxation . If you paid your premiums with your post tax or after tax dollars then your disability benefits should not be taxed . If your employer pays your premiums and writes them off on the company taxes , then the disability benefits would be taxed as ordinary income and you will receive a 1099 from the insurance company or AFLAC in this case .
There is a huge inventory of disability insurance companies that carry short term disability and some short term disability group plans for business . Before purchasing short term disability insurance , make sure your employer does n't offer it . Here are a few on short term disability companies that come to mind Mutual of Omaha , Aflac , Lincoln Financial Group .
If you are an employee at a business that has offered Aflac to its employees through a section 125 cafeteria plan -LRB- a tax-advantaged funding method that allows a person to fund their premiums with a portion of their earnings before they obtain `` constructive reception '' of the money , thus lowering their adjusted gross income and avoiding FICA and FUTA taxes -RRB- . You are able to obtain short term disability with adjustable `` elimination periods '' -LRB- how long you wait before you start to get your disability payments -RRB- and payment periods -LRB- how long you get your short term disability for -RRB- . With Aflac STD you can even return to work and continue 100 % of your STD payments as long as you are making less then 80 % of what you were previously making . How much you recieve will depend on your earnings , due to the principal of unjust enrichment you are prevented from making a profit from your disability and thus can only suppliment your normal income up to a stated percentage-generally about 70-80 % .
Unfortunately , you are not able to purchase Aflac short term disability insurance as an individual . To buy Aflac 's short term disability coverage requires that you are employed by a business that offers it , and then it is paid for by payroll deduction . You would need to contact the business you work for to get the rates for this insurance .
What does AFLAC ' c Cancer policy pay ? I can only give you a general idea as each policy pays out different amounts , depending on the level of coverage you purchase . With that said , AFLACs Cancer policies usually pay for : Cancer tests such as Mammographies cervical screening colonoscopies , daily hospital benefit for room and board , some cancer drugs , cancer surgical benefits , anesthesiologist , daily doctor visits while you are in the hospital , blood , plasma , radiation therapy , chemotherapy , reconstruction after surgery , daily visits to the hospital by the patients doctor , benefits for travel to a cancer center including hotel , airfare , gas for your car to get there , ambulance benefits . These are some of the main coverages , but remember that there either annual or lifetime limits as to how much AFLAC will pay , it all depends on your policy .
As you can see from the above answers there are many insurance companies that offer income disability insurance . Aflac is one that was n't mentioned above . Most insurance companies that offer life insurance also offer income disability insurance . So as Kelly said a good idea is to work with an Insurance Adviser who is also a Broker and can `` shop '' a number of companies to find the best rates for the coverage that you want .
To obtain the cost for Aflac Disability Insurance for you , you need to contact their company or a local American Family Life Assurance Company of Columbus agent . The price will depend on a number of factors and the type of policy you choose . An Aflac agent can guide you through those choices and help you get the Disability policy that works best for you and your budget .
To the best of my knowledge AFLAC does not offer a true disability policy . There policies are primarily supplemental , designed to pay in addition to any other coverage you may have . These policies are very good but are more limited than a true disability policy You might consider a combination of both disability insurance and a supplement to help pay for any elimination period or extra bills and lost wages you may incur .
No , Aflac is a life & health carrier , offering supplemental policies , that pay you not the doctor or hospital . If you have an injury for example , Aflac would pay you for sickness or injury . Auto , home owners , liability , & commercial insurance , would be considered property & causality insurance . Think of it as P&C covers your property , & any liability for causality or risk you would incur .
Yes , Aflac does offer life insurance . American Family Life Assurance Company -LRB- Aflac -RRB- offers Term life insurance , Universal life insurance , and Whole life insurance . To compare Aflac life insurance rates with the rates of other Life insurance carriers , be sure to compare the same term length or features of permanent policies .
In the context that I believe you are using the term `` supplemental '' that would be a short term disability policy offered as a voluntary -LRB- employee paid -RRB- benefit at your place of employment . there are a variety of insurance carriers who offer such products with AFLAC , Colonial Life and Allstate being just a few examples . These products are generally offered at the workplace and are paid for via payroll deduction with your employer remitting the monthly premium to the insurance carrier . Unlike many supplemental/worksite/voluntary employee benefits such as critical illness plans , cancer and accident policies , I would not recommend that you have a disability insurance policy 's premium taken out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis as this could have tax implications in the event you ended up receiving benefits from the policy .
Aflac offers short term disability that can be purchased on a group basis , only . They do not carry traditional long term care disability policies , but offer a variety of plans that are intended to help out someone suffering from a condition that can render them unable to work for a period of time . These go into effect when triggered by something like an illness or hospitalization rather than a loss of income .
If you pay your Aflac Disability Insurance premiums with money that has already been taxed , your benefits are not usually taxed if/when you collect your Disability Insurance benefits . For employer provided Disability Insurance through Aflac or any other company , contact your human resources department to determine if your Aflac insurance benefits are taxable .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Where To Invest 401K After Retirement ?
That is a great question ! A really great question , and if there were just one great answer , everyone would be doing it , and there would be no seniors living in poverty -LRB- 55 % of all Seniors live at or below poverty level , according to the 2012 Census -RRB- . To give you an answer that would work for you , I 'd need to know what assets you have , where they are located , how liquid they are , what your risk tolerance is , what your retirement goals are , how your insurance protection is , your health and your spouses health status , and more . To give you a generic answer ? Somewhere where the bulk is protected yet fairly liquid , with the opportunity to draw a steady income from in the best tax advantaged way . If you would like to contact me with more specifics , I 'd be happy to give you some better advice . Thanks for asking !
As you approach retirement you should try to find a planner who is willing to help you with retirement income planning . This is an emerging field but addresses the issue that you have raised . Converting your assets into something that you can spend is critical and advice is usually important . As a holding instrument you can roll proceeds of a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- into an IRA . You dont gain anything tax wise in doing a roll-over , however , you might gain greater control of your asset and an increased ability to plan disbursing money .
The appropriate answer here is '' anywhere you want to invest your 401k assets . '' I mean who are you ? What are your goals ? What have you been investing your 401k in ? How can any adviser tell you where to invest after retirement without knowing you ? Sorry , but I think this is a dumb question . Usually , people roll 401k assets over into an IRA . Some employers allow you to stay put and keep your current investments .
The appropriate answer here is '' anywhere you want to invest your 401k assets . '' I mean who are you ? What are your goals ? What have you been investing your 401k in ? How can any adviser tell you where to invest after retirement without knowing you ? Sorry , but I think this is a dumb question . Usually , people roll 401k assets over into an IRA . Some employers allow you to stay put and keep your current investments .
That is a really good question ! And trust me , you 're not the only one asking it ... There are really very few certainties in life , but we all seek to find as many as possible . Knowing that we have a safely protected retirement certainly ranks up near the top . While we can not guarantee that our retirement fund will last , there are some things that you can do to help ensure it : 1 . -RRB- Have a clear picture of what retirement means to you - does it mean travelling and dining out often ? If so , your fund will need to be large enough to accommodate that . If it looks more like fishing and working part time , then perhaps your fund can be a little more modest , and still be fine . But if you do not know , `` People without vision perish , '' as the Proverb goes . 2 . -RRB- Pay close attention to how your 401k is performing . If you do n't know what it is doing , you are right to worry . While I do not recommend knee jerk reactions to losses , trends are worth paying attention to , especially if they are negative , precipitous , and lengthy . 3 . -RRB- Know your spending habits . Have a very good grip on your budget process , and where you can squeeze out a little more to invest . Having good habits and keeping debt low entering retirement helps with the life of your investment also . 4 . -RRB- Do not put all of your eggs in one basket , or as you more commonly hear , diversify . Start a Roth IRA to balance out your taxable 401k ; Purchase an annuity or two to ensure a steady income stream that will not run out . Purchase some property that you can earn an income from during retirement ; invest in bonds and low maintenance mutual funds . 5 . -RRB- Plan for the inevitable medical expenses that come with age . The Law allows for a dedicated retirement account used exclusively for health care to be non-taxable , if health issues are likely , start one . Look at a life insurance policy that includes living benefit provisions , or look into long term care protection . If your company offers an HSA , enroll , and start paying into it . 6 . -RRB- Save , save , save . Find high yield savings accounts , and be certain to have an emergency account . Having one allows you to be able to not have to make withdrawals from your retirement funds , or acquire more debt . Having one allows you to be able to make investments that otherwise would only be dreams . The best way to alleviate worry is to trust ; Faith in the One who provides for us , and being a good steward of what we 're given allows us to sleep at night . Hopefully there are ideas here that will help you . Please feel free to contact me if you would like a more personal analysis of where you sit . A great question , and one I 'm glad that you asked . Thanks !
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 591/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
That is a great question ! In the technical sense , yes , 401k 's are a retirement plan . They were not originally designed to be the primary retirement vehicle though . Originally , they were designed to compliment the pension , or company retirement plan that you would receive from your employer . As time has passed , less and less companies offer pension plans , and turned to 401k 's as a way to offer a retirement option while not having the risk of paying you after you retire . They contribute a certain amount , but the risk of losses is strictly yours . As a result , many folks have seen their retirement funds disappear when the market has fared poorly . A 401k can be a valuable part of your retirement plan , but should not be the entirety of it . Please contact me , if you would like more details , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
Whole Life Insurance has many great aspects but using it as a retirement investment is not one of them . There are some companies that are promoting a concept of using your whole life insurance as your personal bank , instead of getting a loan from a bank to buy something use the cash value of your life insurance and then pay yourself back . But when it comes to retirement a whole life policy will not give you the gains needed to fund your retirement . When you look at your retirement saving , whether its your 401K that we are talking about or youre personal saving . Your financial planner should be telling you that you can only talk out about 5 % of the value per year otherwise you may run out of money . Think about that , if you have $ 100,000 in a 401k that will give you a yearly income of only $ 5,000 . If you are looking for options to protect yourself against premature loss and has additional income options for retirement then you should really look at index universal life . A 45yr old male non-smoker could invest $ 150 per month into a $ 100,000 life insurance policy and when he retires at 65 , he should be receiving about $ 6,000 of yearly income , most of which is tax free . This is a great option for most individuals , if you need more help or have additional questions please feel free to contact me .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
A profit sharing plan falls under IRS section 401 . Both a profit sharing plan and 401k are forms of retirement plans that allow employees to make pre-tax contributions to an account where contributions and earnings are not taxed until they are pulled out during the distribution phase . It is important to note that a profit sharing plan does not have to be part of a retirement plan . A profit sharing plan typically allows the employer to decide from year-to-year whether to contribute on behalf of participants . It would make sense that this decision follows the company 's profitability for the previous year . While there are variations of both types of retirement plans , there are many similarities between profit sharing plans and 401k 's such as the ability to take out a loan or pull money out based on a narrow definition of hardship . Both can have non-elective employer contributions . An employer can offer both a profit sharing plan and a 401k . You might find this link to an IRS publication helpful regarding profit sharing plans . WEBSITELINK
A 401k can be rolled over at most any bank , insurance , investment , financial firm in the country . The type of investment or annuity vehicle is actually the choice you must understand.That vehicle will get you different types of return on your money . Its very important to research where the 401k is rolled over which notifies the IRS or the rollover so it is not taxable .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
401K plans have been one of the primary ways people who work save for retirement . It is what is known as a qualified plan meaning that it is subject to government enforced rules and regulations regarding how money goes into it , how much can go in , how it comes out and how much at one time . Employers offer these plans and agree to put in a certain amount -LRB- in some cases , not all -RRB- so that an employee can grow their nest egg while working . The funds grow tax deferred -LRB- no taxes due till funds are distributed to employee -RRB- , typically have options as to where you will invest them and traditionally accumulate over time . You can ask your employer about their 401K plan if they offer one . You usually have to work with them for a few months or a year before you beome eligible to join .
How to set up a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- ? First before you decide on a 401k as your retirement plan , make sure it makes sense . Most people know the name 401k and sort of apply it as all retirement plans , but actually it 's one of many plans out there that an employer can use . The big thing I would suggest anyone look at before establishing a retirement plan is the cost of the plan itself . Typically a 401k will have fees for all people under the plan , participating or not . You will have discrimination tests to be run on the plan and contributions . Before you commit to a particular plan , check and see what the plan cost to operate . If your costs are greater than your returns , is it a good choice ?
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Level Of Life Insurance Do I Need ?
When the word `` level '' is used in the context of life insurance , it usually refers to a guaranteed level premium , or guaranteed level face amount . This means that the premium or face amount will stay the same -LRB- level -RRB- for a set amount of time . I recommend getting a level premium and face amount for as long as possible . 30 years is reasonably priced level term insurance for younger to middle aged persons .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Pure Term Life insurance has premiums that increase every year as you get older . Most people do n't like a premium that goes up every year so they decide how long they need the insurance and level out the premiums by buying level premium term . When you do this you are paying extra in the earlier years in order to level out the premium in the later years of your level premium period . That is why 1-year term is much cheaper than 20-year term . When you buy term life insurance , you should determine how long you want the premium to be level and buy it for that length . For instance if your mortgage is paid off in 18-more years , you should buy a 20-year level term policy if the mortgage payoff is the reason for the insurance .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Do term life insurance policies have a cash surrender value ? Usually they do not . Cash value is essentially needed in a policy to keep the premium level . You pay more in early years and some of the premium is left after covering the risk for the year and it grows the amount at risk to the insurance company decreases . Might be easier to understand the concept using a $ 100.000 non-participating level premium whole life . The cost of insurance at age 40 is much less than at age 85 . You pay a level premium and there is a build up of guaranteed cash that grows at a guaranteed interest rate inside the policy . If you were to die at age 85 , you beneficiary receives the $ 100,000 face amount of the policy . The cash value build up is not paid separately , but is part of the death benefit . Most term policies are as the name suggest are for a specified term . The cash value is theoretically there to keep the premium level , but there is no cash surrender value . Some policies with a longer term for example 30 year term policies do have cash surrender values . These are just general guidelines and you would need to check the policy wordings to be sure . Working with an independent insurance broker , you should be able to find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
When the word `` level '' is used in the context of life insurance , it usually refers to a guaranteed level premium , or guaranteed level face amount . This means that the premium or face amount will stay the same -LRB- level -RRB- for a set amount of time . I recommend getting a level premium and face amount for as long as possible . 30 years is reasonably priced level term insurance for younger to middle aged persons .
I do n't think you can state whole life is actually better than term life insurance or term life insurance is better than whole life . It just depends on the need by you , the client . There are many different product options when it comes to life insurance . There is the right product for practically every situation . The true use of whole life is when there is a level premium need for life insurance your `` whole life '' hence the name . However , whole life insurance has become the Swiss Army knife of life insurance . The riders and cash value can be used for critical illness , terminal illness , children 's college funds to retirement benefits . There are now lots of uses for whole life insurance . Term life insurance is meant more to cover a need for a fixed amount of time . There are term limits that vary from annually to 5 years , 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , 25 years , 30 years and even 35 years . You may also set a premium on a universal life plan that does n't build cash value other than to level your premiums as far as age 151 years old . The main thing to consider which type of life insurance you need is to first identify your need for life insurance . A wise man once shared , you should buy life insurance like you will die tomorrow and invest like you will live forever . Find an experienced independent broker to help you identify your needs and shop the market for the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
How does Guaranteed Universal Life work ? Just like level term . Think of it as lifetime level term . With term insurance you pay a premium every month and you have coverage . With GUL you pay the premium every month and you have coverage . The GUL rider on a polcy states that as long as the premium is paid and the policy values remain untouched the company will pay a death claim out to the age chosen by the insured . It could be to age 90 , 100 , 110 , 121 or until passing . The big thing with a GUL vs. a Level term policy is cash values . With level term the insured does not see the cash values generated by the level term policy during it 's level premium run . With level term you overpay early to underpay later and this keeps the premium constant . Same with GUL except now you can ` touch '' the money inside the policy . This is a bad thing if you want the guarantee to remain in place . You simply do not want to mess with your GUL beyond paying your monthly premium every month . GUL is NOT a saving plan ... it is Lifetime TERM , or at least , it should be treated that way .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
It will depend upon what level of health insurance you purchase . Assuming you purchase major medical health insurance , it will now have to be in compliance with the Affordable Care Act . That said , what you may be purchasing can range from a `` Platinum '' level plan with very low out-of-pocket expenses for virtually all areas of health care to a `` Bronze '' plan that may not provide you any coverage at all until you have paid for more than $ 6000 in health care expenses out of your own pocket . One thing that is consistent across the four levels of health insurance plans now available -LRB- Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum -RRB- is that a wide range of preventive health care services will be covered at 100 % with no cost sharing by the subscriber . Yes , you are also buying `` peace of mind '' that in the event of a serious illness or injury that your personal financial exposure is limited to that $ 6000 + number each year -LRB- which will increase in future years -RRB- and you also are now buying guaranteed access to health insurance with no pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . In the abstract I think everyone agrees that these are good things . However , depending upon your income level what you may be buying may or may not be viewed by the individual as affordable to them . Having recently completed the first open enrollment season under ObamaCare it has surprised me how many people , even ones qualifying for substantial subsidies of their monthly health insurance premiums , still elected to remain uninsured . Clearly , the perceived value proposition of what you get from buying health insurance has a very subject answer that varies greatly from one person to the next .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Term life insurance is available for sale through a number of channels , including online . On the surface deciding what term insurance to choose appears to be simple , who has the best initial price . In addition to determining the amount of insurance needed , there are a few more things to think about . What do the renewal premiums look like ? How long do I need the coverage ? Am I going to want to convert this to level premium permanent insurance ? What conversion options are available ? If the quote is annual , how do the monthly premiums compare ? And more . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies , can help you find the right product at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Bottom line question : What is the best type of life insurance to have ? Bottom line answer : The type that is in force when you die.Keep in mind that life insurance is the only financial vehicle that provides an income-tax free lump sum of money to the one who depends on the insured person financially upon the trigger-point of the contract : the death of the insured . Focus on that death benefit or face amount . Do n't be distracted by cash values , living benefits , etc. to begin with . -LRB- That can come later -RRB- . As far as choosing a `` good life insurance policy '' , the answers are endless . But , here are a few basic parameters to guide you to the answer that is best for you :1 . Ask the beneficiary , `` What would you do if I -LRB- the proposed-insured -RRB- were to die today ? '' . `` Do '' is the key word . This is not a quantitative inquiry . It has to do with values . What matters most to the person you care about ? 2 . Then , `` what would be the negative financial impact to the beneficiary if I were to die today ? '' This is n't that hard for most people . It has to do directly with what the beneficiary believes they would do if the insured dies . For instance , if the beneficiary would sell the house , do n't put that into the equation . If there 's debt , do put it in the equation . Income replacement is typically the most important . But , it may not be if there are no children and the beneficiary has a career . See ? It all depends on what the beneficiary would do . 3 . Once the amount is determined , my suggestion is to first buy a permanent plan of insurance that would cover final expenses . That does n't have to be a large face amount . But , it should be big enough to take care if immediate funeral and burial costs projected to mortality age .4 . Cover the rest of the need with low-cost , guaranteed level premium and fully convertible -LRB- exchange all or part of the term to a permanent plan of insurance without the need to medically qualify -RRB- term.Now you can discuss bells and whistles . But , only pay the extra amount those cost if -LRB- big if -RRB- they have value specific to your situation . An experienced agent who actively listens -LRB- let 's you talk more than s/he does -RRB- can guide you .
Some folks purchase temporary life insurance rather than whole life , either because they have a very temporary need , or feel they do not want to use life insurance as a financial tool . When they do that , they frequently purchase a policy that will last only for ten years , if they pay the premium each year , and do not want it to change . This is called ten year level term . After ten years , if they are alive , they will probably need to start over again and get level term , now at a higher rate , or whole life . With the product I have , New York Life offers a ten year level term , but also offers an annually renewal policy , which works out about the same over ten years . The hope is that and the expectation should be , that the policy holder decides during those ten years or earlier , to convert their term policy to a permanent whole life policy , which builds up cash value and can be borrowed against . Let 's talk . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 . Thank you .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Is Life Insurance Used In Estate Planning ?
Life insurance provides cash at the time of death . Estate planning involves distributing assets at the time of death . Often the estate needs liquidity so that key assets do not have to be sold to pay debtors or taxes . In other cases , the business should pass to one heir and yet the parents might want to provide equally for other heirs . There are as many problems as there are families and life insurance can solve many estate problems .
Financial Planning is a process that provides a client with impartial assistance in analyzing and organizing personal financial affairs in order to achieve financial and lifestyle goals in a tax effective manner . Estate Planning is Financial Planning starting with the end in mind . The principal objective of estate planning is to ensure that your property is managed most efficiently during your lifetime and that your wishes are carried out most effectively after you die . Life insurance can be used in numerous ways to help you achieve your estate planning objectives . In fact , there are too many to be completely covered here , so I will provide a few examples to give an overview . Life insurance can be used to create an estate -LRB- wealth -RRB- : - Cash at death to retire your debts - Leave your survivors with a home - An income for your family - An emergency fund - An education fund - and more Life insurance can be used to conserve an estate : - Cash at death to pay the tax and estate fees and avoid a bargain estate sale . An example would be that bills are due at death and your assets are in bricks and mortar . In order to generate cash , your heirs may have to sell at a loss to pay taxes and other bills . - Cash at death to provide for favourite charity . - Cash at death for estate equalization , you want to give a fixed asset to one heir and to be fair , provide cash to another . - Business life insurance to protect an important asset . There are a number of additional strategies available that use life insurance to conserve or increase the value of your estate and to provide you with living benefits as well . It all depends on your individual objectives . There is additional information on Estate Planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy . The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
That is an excellent question ! The best things about life insurance when it comes to estate planning are that first , it is n't taxable . It is an excellent way of transferring wealth without paying taxes . Second , it is usually not held up in probate , and therefore the funds are released to the beneficiary without any issues . That said , if your estate is a large one , you may need to put some thought into how the policy is structured , to avoid potential problems . Please consult an attorney , financial planner , or tax advisor , and your agent to be certain of the best route for you . Thanks for asking !
Estate planning is the process used to distribute or dispose of one 's estate before and/or after one 's death . Life insurance is a financial product that pays out at death . Therefore , life insurance is good fit for estate planning . Some things that people look for in estate planning are simplicity , minimizing taxes , the ability to have control over their assets , contingencies for if they are incapacitated , and above all , the ability to pass their wealth on to whom they desire . Life insurance normally passes income tax free to the beneficiary of one 's choice , and once the policy is in place , there is little to nothing that has to be done to maintain it . Only the owner of the policy can change it . Therefore , life insurance meets many of the criteria that people look for when planning the disposal or transfer of their estate .
Financial Planning is a process that provides a client with impartial assistance in analyzing and organizing personal financial affairs in order to achieve financial and lifestyle goals in a tax effective manner . Estate Planning is Financial Planning starting with the end in mind . The principal objective of estate planning is to ensure that your property is managed most efficiently during your lifetime and that your wishes are carried out most effectively after you die . Life insurance can be used in numerous ways to help you achieve your estate planning objectives . In fact , there are too many to be completely covered here , so I will provide a few examples to give an overview . Life insurance can be used to create an estate -LRB- wealth -RRB- : - Cash at death to retire your debts - Leave your survivors with a home - An income for your family - An emergency fund - An education fund - and more Life insurance can be used to conserve an estate : - Cash at death to pay the tax and estate fees and avoid a bargain estate sale . An example would be that bills are due at death and your assets are in bricks and mortar . In order to generate cash , your heirs may have to sell at a loss to pay taxes and other bills . - Cash at death to provide for favourite charity . - Cash at death for estate equalization , you want to give a fixed asset to one heir and to be fair , provide cash to another . - Business life insurance to protect an important asset . There are a number of additional strategies available that use life insurance to conserve or increase the value of your estate and to provide you with living benefits as well . It all depends on your individual objectives . There is additional information on Estate Planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A life insurance trust is a term often used to describe an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a form of trust drafted by an estate planning attorney in situations where it is intended that life insurance be held outside the client 's taxable estate . Such life insurance proceeds are usually planned to help pay estate taxes without having to sell existing estate assets . Otherwise , any life insurance owned by the client in their taxable estate would needlessly increase the value of the estate for estate tax purposes subjecting the estate to even higher estate taxes . With recent changes in estate tax exemptions , most individuals will not have to resort to ILIT in their estate plans unless their attorney suggests it for other non tax planning reasons .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy . The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is alegal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trustsreceive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy.The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
The principal objective of estate planning is to ensure that your property is managed most efficiently during your lifetime and that your wishes are carried out most effectively after you die . Since life insurance creates tax free cash at death it has many applications in Estate Planning . Life insurance can be used to create an estate , to provide cash to take care of your family after you are gone . Life insurance can also be used in estate conservation and estate equalization . Once you have determined your objectives and calculated the need for cash to pay taxes , fees and other costs , nothing delivers cash at death as effectively as life insurance . Another use is estate equalization , in a situation where you want to give a fixed asset to one heir and balance it out with life insurance cash to another . In business situations , life insurance can be used to provide the cash not only to pay taxes and fees , but also to fund a buy sell agreement between partners . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
First of all , I need to stress that you should talk to an estate planning attorney about this topic . We life insurance guys know our way around the block here , but frankly , you should talk to an expert . Same as anything else where you need the best advice possible . Make sure it is an attorney who does specialize in estate planning . Real estate attorneys have their own area of expertise , as do commercial attorneys . Talk to somebody who knows the ins and outs of estate taxation . But , I can talk in generalities . If you own your life insurance , it would be included in your estate . If your spouse owns it , it would be included in his or her estate . Does any of this matter ? It does if you want to avoid or minimize estate taxation when your estate is settled . This means keeping both the state and federal tax people out of the picture to the greatest extent possible . How can you do this ? Well , since the ownership of assets is the key trigger in determining into whose estate money falls , then you can be creative with the ownership designation of your policy . It could be a trust . It could be another relative , such as an adult child . It could be your business . How do you make this decision ? This is where you talk with your estate planning legal expert and explore the ramifications of each choice . Taxation is not your only concern . There are issues related to control of assets as well . With the right guidance , you can put together a plan that gets the job done .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
In the simplest terms life insurance helps in estate planning because it creates a pool of money upon death . This money can be used for any purpose , but in most cases when estate planning is involved , it is used to pay estate taxes due . The main reason people do this is it allows other assets to remain untouched by the estate tax reach . Examples would be a business , investments , art work , real estate , etc. . that would n't have to be liquidated to pay estate taxes . So the easiest and simpliest way to look at life insurance in an estate plan is to pay off Uncle Sam so Uncle goes away . Nothing does it quicker or easier than life insurance . Estate Planning does n't have to be hard , people just make it that way .
There can be federal estate tax exposure on life insurance death benefit proceeds . To avoid federal estate tax exposure , many estate attorneys recommend using an irrevocable life insurance trust to own the life entrance policy , which in effect then is deemed as being out of the estate . Some estate planning strategies use other family members as the policy owner to accomplish removing the future death benefit proceeds outside the estate . Consult your estate planning attorney before moving forward with any ownership changes or assigning ownership to a life insurance policy .
Who pays estate taxes on life insurance ? Well the estate executor is usually the one charged with payment from estate assets for any estate taxes due . Are there estate taxes due on life insurance ? Yes and no , depending on how well a person has planned for that situation . Life insurance can easily be taken out of the estate tax tab by moving ownership out of the taxable estate , via trust or other trusted family member -LRB- not spouse -RRB- . You can leave ownership oflife insurance in the estate , buteven though the proceeds go elsewhere , the amount paid out becomes an asset to theestate .
Your life insurance is not included in your will . The monies are paid out as designated by the policy -LRB- the primary beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- are paid first - if the primary beneficiary predeceases the insured , the contingent beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- would be paid the proceeds -RRB- . If the monies are paid to the insured 's estate -LRB- the estate is the beneficiary to the policy or all named beneficiaries predeceased the insured -RRB- then the will would control how the monies are distributed because it controls who receives what from the estate . If the insured dies intestate -LRB- did not have a will -RRB- then the monies and the rest of the estate will go through the probate process . A life insurance trust can often be more useful for avariety of reasons including controlling exactly how you want the proceeds distributed and when they are distributed to the recipients , and estate tax purposes .
An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries .
Sure thing . People do it all the time . Why do they use a trust ? You certainly want to talk to an estate planning attorney about that . Get legal expert advice from a legal expert . But , I can tell you a few things as someone with many clients who have used a trust in their life insurance planning . Its a great way to keep large amounts of money out of your estate , and therefore out of the sights of the taxman . Estate tax bills can be a huge ; fortunately , legitimate legal tools such as trusts are available to minimize the bite . A number of trusts are available for use . Which one would be best , given your circumstances ? Ask your attorney . -LRB- And by the way : make sure its an attorney who specializes in estate planning . A lot of money is on the line here , and you want to make sure you get the best advice possible . Your real estate or commercial lawyer may be a good guy , but he doesnt have the specialized knowledge that an estate planning specialist has . -RRB- Remember that when you use a trust , you lose control . The trustee runs things . Thats why your choice of trustee is a key management decision . Give this a lot of thought . Ask your attorney about the legal and fiduciary responsibilities of a trustee . He or she can be liable if the policy inside the trust does not perform as outlined . This brings up the all-important function of a life insurance policy audit . On a regular basis , that policy should be reviewed to make sure it is meeting expectations . The cost , the benefit , and the guarantee period on the premium should all be verified . For example : what if a universal life product was used , but due to a price increase , the coverage will terminate 10 years earlier than scheduled ? Not a good situation . You dont want to be in a situation when the policy will have failed right when a claim is supposed to be filed . This means that your broker , your trustee , and your attorney need to buddy-up and work together to make sure your insurance trust and the policy it holds are doing their job .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What To Look For In Renters Insurance ?
The key to purchasing a renters policy is to understand what your exposure might be . Take pictures of everything in your unit that belongs to you , including your clothing , appliances , dishes etc. . Then review the photographs listing the items and their replacement cost . Add the list of replacement costs and you will have the amount of personal property that you have at risk in your unit . I suggest you then meet with an insurance agent and discuss the best way to cover that risk . A claim is not the best time to discover that you are underinsured . Always select the highest possible liability limit . A lawsuit can ruin your weekend .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
Obtaining Renters Insurance is simple and quick ! There are n't too many questions to answer and there are just a few points to look out for ! If you are renting an apartment , a house or a townhouse/condo , you would qualify to purchase a renters insurance policy . If the landlord has required you to purchase the insurance , it is important to find out whether the landlord wishes to be listed as an ` Additional Insured ' on the policy ; if so , you would need to ask how the Additional Insured clause would read -LRB- i.e. Name , Address , Account # etc. . . -RRB- If you are simply looking for the Cheapest Renters Insurance , you would request the minimum available Personal Property Coverage , the minimum available Personal Liability Coverage , and the maximum Deductible available . This would generate the lowest premium . On the other hand , if it is your desire to assure that all your belongings including artwork , jewelry , furs and additional high value possessions are sufficiently covered , you would need to speak with a licensed representative to assess whether the policy has available options to extend coverage to provide what you would need ; or if perhaps , an additional Personal Article Floater may need to be purchased . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
Renters Insurance is designed to cover all your personal property as long as it is listed . Be sure to write down and video each room , if available , to help identify your personal property . Be sure to look at current value vs. replacement value when considering Renters Insurance . Current value will only pay you what your TV is worth today not what it costs to replace it . I would recommend getting the replacement value type with Renters Insurance .
Renters policies are essentially the same type of policy as a regular homeowners adjusted to deal with property and liability exposures for a person who rents as opposed to some one who owns a property . So , the biggest property exposure for a renter is typically the '' contents '' that belong to you . A key issue to be aware of is that losses can be settled on both an actual cash value basis , or replacement cost basis . Replacement cost will be more expensive , but the actual cash value of things is depreciating every day you own it . For example look at the computer you are using . Compare it to ones in use 20 years ago . If you have one of the dinosaurs do n't expect to get much for its actual cash value since is essentially depreciated to zero . The other major group of coverages is called Section II of most renters policies and this offers you protection from claims or law suits alleging that you caused others some bodily injury or property damage to others . An easy example to understand is dog bites which are often the second leading cause of homeowner losses for a carrier . If your dog bites somebody it is not going to matter to an individual or the courts whether you own or rent your residence . Essentially you look to your renters policy for not only the coverage but also very importantly the defense costs associated with defending you from such allegations .
That is a great question ! There are a million people that will line up to help you put together a plan . Some will honestly want to help you , and some will look at you like a wolf looks at a fat , three-legged sheep . Please be careful , and go with someone that comes with high recommendations . Here 's what you can do to get started . Take a few minutes , and decide what retirement looks like to you . Are you fishing , travelling , working , not working , debt free ? Now take a look at your current financial status . What do you need to do between here , and retirement to make that happen ? I tell people that if you want to live at your current standard of living in retirement , then you will want to have squirreled away between 8-10 times what your current salary is . If you want to live better than you are now , then you 've really got to get started . Once you 've got an idea of what you need to save , then you can talk to your HR person at work about company match 401k , or other programs they might offer ; You can talk to your insurance agent or banker and get some ideas , or you can find an advisor that can help you take a look at how to make your vision of retirement a comfortable reality . I hope that gives you an idea , feel free to drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Get Life Insurance For Your Parents ?
To get life insurance for your parents , start by asking them if it is OK to take out a policy on them , or for you to help them get a policy on themselves . Then gather their information : height , weight , any medications they take , any health problems they have now or in the past . Call a broker who carries Senior Life Insurance and find your best price and type of policy . If for final expense purposes , you will need permanent insurance , or the policy could end before it is needed and then be impossible to get a new one . Your parents will need to sign the application and possibly complete a phone interview . If getting a large policy over $ 50,000 they will probably need to take a free exam done in their home . Once approved , either you or they can pay the premiums . Paying the first premium will put it into effect . And that takes care of it .
Yes , a child can get life insurance for a parent . The parent must sign the application and do the exam , if an exam is required . If there is no exam required , the application process often involves a phone interview , and the parent must be able to answer the interview questions on their own . If you support your parent in any way , you can get a policy to help reimburse you after your parent passes . If you do not financially support your parent , you are still eligible to get your parent a small final expense policy . Contact an online final expense life insurance agency to get prices and types of policies available . It is a great thing you are doing ; all the best to you and your parent .
The best place to start in purchasing life insurance for a parent is to discuss the idea with them . They will , at a minimum , need to sign the application , so you can not do it without their knowledge . If they apply for a small , simplified issue policy , they will probably need to do a phone interview with the insurance company . If applying for a larger policy , they will need to take a life insurance exam that my include an EKG and questions to test their cognitive function . If they are not willing to participate in the application process in any way , they can get guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- but will still need to sign the application -RRB- . In this first conversation , you can get an idea of what type of policy to look for by asking them how involved they want to get in the application process . At this time , you should also get a list of their medications and current and past health conditions . Most adult children are unaware of their parents ' complete health history . If your parent does not want to share that with you , they should contact an agent themselves , for their quote . You can find the most competitive rates for your parent at agencies that sell a selection of products . If the policy is going to be under $ 50,000 , there are agencies that specialize in those . The agency may call that type of policy Senior Life , as our agency does . Or they may call it Burial Insurance , Funeral Insurance , or Final Expense Insurance . If you are looking for a larger face amount , contact an agency that is experienced in Senior Life Insurance . If your parent has very serious health issues , Guaranteed Issue may be the way to go . Most companies will allow a child to pay for a policy for their parent . Whether or not you can own the policy will depend on a variety of factors . If you approach the purchase with the preparation explained above , it can be a very easy process and leave your parent feeling fulfilled , rather than frustrated .
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
An expecting parent has at least 20 years of reasons for life insurance ahead of them . Would there be enough income to pay for good childcare if one parent passed ? How about basketballs shoes , cheerleading outfits , study guides for the SAT ? How about college ? Most expecting parents have not had time to build up a good nest egg before the birth of their first child , and it is really hard to grow it while raising children . Life Insurance provides a large , immediate source of income upon death , and has a very reasonable price at your age . Since your need is limited , 20 to 30 year Term insurance would suffice on each of you , and that is very affordable . If you like , you can add your baby to the policy for about $ 5/month , and that will ensure that he/she is able to get life insurance for the rest of his/her life , even if he/she would develop an uninsurable health condition later on . Such an exciting time and what a lucky baby to have such thoughtful parents . Wishing you all the best . PS You will probably need to wait until a few weeks after the baby is born for Mom to get her policy .
To buy life insurance for a parent , start by contacting an agency that specializes in final expense life insurance . I have found that when a child is buying life insurance for a parent , most parents would rather not take an exam . Final Expense Life Insurance agents have a broad range of policies , and can accommodate that desire to avoid an exam , if that is preferred . You will want to gather your parent 's health history , or have your parent prepared to get on the phone to answer health questions with a life insurance representative . A list of their medications and incidences of illness or hospitalizations in the past 10 years are helpful to know to get the best price . If you want the policy to be for final expense needs , you will most likely want permanent life insurance . Be sure to get a policy that will not go up in price , or you could end up being unable to afford the policy before it is needed .
Life insurance underwriting gives a lot of latitude to the definition of dependent . Its actually pretty interesting . I think this is because the whole principle of insurable interest implies a certain dependency . It is this principle that is the bottom line as to whether or not the company accepts the beneficiary designation on a submitted application . So who really can be dependent on the insured financially , and thereby qualify as a beneficiary on his or her policy ? Certainly a spouse . Does the spouse have to be working ? No . Can the spouse be rich and independently wealthy ? Yes . They still can be considered financially interdependent . Kids ? For sure . Minors ? Of course . How about children that are of legal age ? Well , they certainly could still be financially dependent on their parents . To some extent . -LRB- Until their parents boot them out of the nest :-RRB- Parents ? Yes . That is very common these days . Elder parents become dependent on their grown children financially . Sad to see , but it happens all the time . Other family members ? Could be . How many times do you see a family taking in a niece , nephew , cousin , aunt , or uncle ? Then you have the whole realm of domestic partners . Same sex . Opposite sex . Older man , younger woman . Older woman , younger man . As long as they have some kind of financial independence shared accounts , etc. they could be named as beneficiaries . And we havent even talked about how businesses can be dependent on people , as well as charities . Interesting , dont you think ?
If your parent is age 65 or older , they qualify for Medicare so you can not typically add them onto your healthcare coverage at that point . Depending on the particular health plan you are enrolled in , you may or may not be able to add your parent onto that plan . Check the summary page in your health plan and see what it says or you can check with your health plan administrator to confirm whether they allow parents as dependents on your family plan . If your health plan allows this , here are other qualifications you will have to meet with the IRS . You must already be claiming your parent as a dependent on your federal tax filing . The IRS dependent qualifications include : Your parent is under age 65 , makes under $ 3650 per year gross income , you provide more than half of your parents ' support for the year .
To get life insurance on your parents , the first step would be to gather their health information . Ask them for their medications , dates of diagnoses , treatment dates , whether they use -LRB- d -RRB- tobacco and when , and their weight now and a year ago . Often adult children think they know all these details about their parents , but it never hurts to ask . Being declined for an overlooked health reason is hard on both parents and children , and can be avoided with thorough fact finding ahead of time . Once you have this information , you can shop agencies that carry senior policies and/or final expense policies to get their best price . Some of these policies will simply require your parents to sign the application ; some will require a phone interview ; and some will require an exam . If you do not know what your parent is willing to go along with ahead of time , gather quotes for a couple different types of policies to present to them . If you are applying for a large face amount , the life insurance company will require that you have a financial interest in your parents ' lives , such as you living in their house or they living in yours . Smaller face amounts for final expense purposes will not usually have that requirement .
To buy life insurance for your parents , I suggest that you first sit down with them and discuss the prospect of buying life insurance . You may need to speak from your heart , explaining that you worry how you are going to be able to give them the send off they deserve when their lives end . Keep in mind that they may be embarrassed if they can not afford to buy life insurance for themselves . Or they just may find it too painful to think about . With a loving approach and clarification about who is paying for the policy , this conversation will pave the way for a smooth purchase . When you are ready to shop , be sure to get the list of medications your parents take , their health history , height and weight , and other relevant information . Then you can call websites that offer Senior Life Insurance . Most people who are buying life insurance for their parents get a policy that does not require an exam . For final expenses such as funeral , you will want a permanent policy that is sure to be in effect when your parents pass away . You also want to get one where the price is locked in , so that it does not become unaffordable as they age . Applying will require that they sign the app , and they may need to do a phone interview . Most people choose to have the premium drafted when approved , so that the policy goes into effect within a very short time . It is a good thing you are doing . Best wishes !
If you have individual health insurance the answer is definitely - NO . If you are covered under an employer 's group health plan the answer is almost always No as well . However , there is a very narrow circumstance where you might be able to add a parent onto your group coverage . I 've never seen it in real life but here 's how I understand it could be approached . First , you have to determine if your parent qualifies as a dependent under IRS guidelines . IRS guidelines say that if your parent is under age 65 , they have an annual income of less than $ 3650 and you pay more than half of your parent 's total support for the year you can claim them as a dependent . As you can see , these a some pretty hard criteria to meet but I 'm sure there have to be some people out there that fit this profile . Next , you will have to have a serious meeting with your employer and have family coverage available through your employer 's health plan . You ca n't add your parent as an individual . If your current coverage level is employee only you would have to change it to a level where two or more adults can be covered -LRB- e.g. - family coverage -RRB- . You must be prepared to provide documentation -LRB- tax filings , etc. -RRB- to your employer to support your request and , in all candor , I 'd visit with a family lawyer before meeting with your employer . It is highly likely that your HR person or the business owner has never been presented with this situation before and it 's such a rare situation that in some ways it defies common sense and is at odds with what is commonly accepted business personnel practices . Until your question prompted me to do some research my initial reaction was `` no way '' and I 've been in the business for 30 years . You should n't expect this to be easy to accomplish , you may have to be the educator and you may find yourself having to deal with your employer , their insurance broker/consultant and probably the health insurance carrier themselves and to be expecting resistance every step of the way .
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
Generally married children can not be on the parents policy . What happens if you try to hide this `` material fact '' and you have an accident and now you need to file a claim ? Usually if you are on your `` parents '' policy the parent is the `` primary '' driver and you are a child that just drives your parents car sporadically . If you or your spouse have a vehicle and you have the car financed in your name and your parents are not on the note-can you say Red Flag ?
You can take out life insurance on anyone with whom you have an insurable interest . This can be established simply by being a close family member , in the US . However , financial insurable interest must exist even with these types of relationships , with most life insurance companies . E.g. . An adult child can take out a small policy on an aging parent because of the the emotional loss that would occur upon the death of the parent . But in order to take out a large policy there must usually be financial loss . I.e. . The adult child contributes financially to their parent and are using life insurance to offset that , or their parent contributes financially to them and they would suffer financial loss upon the death of that parent .
In most cases , as long as the cars are in your parents name and your parents want to continue to assume liability for your actions you can stay on your parents policy . Some carriers will start to question why a child is still on a policy if the child become older , say in their 30 's but it is still doable . There comes a time when parents make the call as they feel their child should be responsible enough to be on their own and not continue to place liability on the parents .
Yes , if your parents have you listed as a `` Rated Driver . '' I need to qualify the above answer by saying this : some carriers look at all household members and will sometimes deny insurance based upon one potential driver . A regional carrier that I deal with will refuse to insure an entire household if one of the household members is an uninsurable interest . What this means is if a child/spouse/insured has a bad driving record they will not provide insurance . How it works with most companies is that household members can be non-rated drivers , which means they have to get their own insurance through another policy . Another thing to consider is whether you live in the house . If you do not , but are under the age of 25 , your parents can get an endorsement for `` Child Away At School '' to get you coverage . However , if you are not in school and/or over the age of 25 then you can not be on your parents ' insurance . I hope this helps .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
Because of recent law changes by President Obama , children may stay on their parent 's health insurance policy up to age 26 . This is true throughout all 50 states . Children dependents , up to age 26 , may stay on their parent 's policy even if they are married , attending school , not financially dependent upon their parents , not living with their parents or even if they are offered their own insurance through employment . Special needs children can be covered under their parent 's plan past age 26 .
Can you get life insurance on your mom ? Yes , you can , but she needs to provide consent to coverage . Actually this is pretty common among sandwich parents these days . A parent picks up a small policy on their parent to pay the cost of the funeral and other expenses involved with taking care of a parent .
It is n't clear if you mean paying premiums for a new policy for your parent where the parent will own and be the insured of the policy or if you mean to take out life insurance on your parent 's life but be the premium payor , owner and beneficiary . In the former , if he/she is insurable , he/she can have a policy on his/her life and you can pay premiums which would be gifts to him/her . This can be done . In the latter , it is permitted under the rules of insurable interest as long as the parent is insurable and consents to the insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Divorce Affect Life Insurance ?
Divorce does not automatically affect life insurance . Unless the policy owner makes changes to the policy , either by choice or court order , the policy will remain the same . That is why it is important to attend to your life insurance after a divorce , or your death benefit may go to the wrong person .
Life insurance is a contract between an insurance company and the owner . The subject of the insurance , the insured , may be someone other than the owner . The owner is the person with the power to change the beneficiary . In a divorce settlement care should be taken to identify the owner of the insurance . Existing insurance is difficult to handle in a divorce settlement . When alimony and/or child support is involved it is often better to have the recipient of those payments purchase and own a policy of life insurance on the party paying the alimony or child support . By doing that all of the control over the policy is in the hands of the recipient , to include the power to change the beneficiary . The other major area of concern involving divorce and life insurance is company sponsored life insurance . Often this is overlooked and the intentions of the court and the desires of the beneficiary thwarted if ownership remains in the hands of the other party . The employee can merely call the HR department and changes the beneficiary to someone else .
Divorce does affect life insurance but maybe not in the way you are asking your question . It does not affect your premiums or cost but it will affect other aspects of your policy . The first thing that needs to be addressed is the beneficiary . You may not want your ex to receive your life insurance proceeds . Next aspect to be examined is your face amount . Now that you are on your own , do you have the proper amount of life insurance for children , loved ones to cover debt , etc. ? Last is the term or type of policy . Are the premiums guaranteed for the proper amount of time ? I recommend sooner rather than later sitting down with your agent to address these needs before it becomes too late .
Larry and Lee have good information . I will add one more thing . Sometimes you had a policy with your spouse where either you or your spouse were a secondary insured on their policy . You usually wo n't want to leave it that way . If you were the main insured , you are paying the extra premium to cover the rider of your ex-spouse . You might want to leave it if you are the beneficiary but you want to be aware of it and be aware of your options . If you are the rider on your ex-Spouse 's policy you have a bigger problem . You should take out new coverage on your own . Do not trust that your Spouse 's policy will always be there to cover you . There are a lot of variables here . Work with your insurance broker and get good advice .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
+1 Larry 's answer . I will add that cash values in Life Insurance can also play a role . They can be considered an asset and the owner of the policy could be made to buy the other party out . Note the owner and the insured may not be the same person . On that note , a decree could also dictate who will be the owner of a policy going forward . Example : If I and my wife own policies on each other .
Maybe better put as can Life insurance be effected by a divorce ? The answer is `` yes '' . The court can degree as part of the settlement that life insurance is maintained and beneficiary be illrevocable for a certain number of years . For example , say children are involved and support is required . The court could mandate that life insurance is carried for a certain number of years and that a trust for the children 's benefit be created upon death to continue support payments . So a life policy could be effected by divorce through legal process . One thing to consider as well is if no requirements are set by the courts , the last stated beneficiary would be the one to receive life insurance proceeds . So failure to change the beneficiary would result in a pay out to someone the insured no longer intended the proceeds to go to . A change of beneficiary form is easy to get and easy to use and becomes part of the policy once submitted to the insurance carrier . You can contact your agent or even the company directly for this form .
Divorce does affect life insurance but maybe not in the way you are asking your question . It does not affect your premiums or cost but it will affect other aspects of your policy . The first thing that needs to be addressed is the beneficiary . You may not want your ex to receive your life insurance proceeds . Next aspect to be examined is your face amount . Now that you are on your own , do you have the proper amount of life insurance for children , loved ones to cover debt , etc. ? Last is the term or type of policy . Are the premiums guaranteed for the proper amount of time ? I recommend sooner rather than later sitting down with your agent to address these needs before it becomes too late .
Divorce does not automatically affect life insurance . Unless the policy owner makes changes to the policy , either by choice or court order , the policy will remain the same . That is why it is important to attend to your life insurance after a divorce , or your death benefit may go to the wrong person .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
It will depend on how the divorce is structured . As an Insurance Agent and not an attorney I wo n't attempt to tell you what the laws says regarding divorce . What I will offer is some suggestions as to what could happen ; 1 -RRB- Nothing - present insurance in force prior to a divorce does not change because of the divorce 2 -RRB- Judge assigns insurance policy - a judge could order that the beneficiary for the policy be changed to support a divorcing spouse or children . He could also issue instructions as to how the cash value of a policy is to be distributed . I would consult an attorney for a more detailed answer .
Generally a divorcee who is a covered dependent loses their eligibility for coverage on the date their divorce is legally granted . If the ex-spouse 's employer group is subject to the Federal COBRA regulations -LRB- 20 + employees -RRB- then a divorced ex-spouse can elect to continue coverage under that group 's health insurance plan . As a divorcee you could continue COBRA coverage for up to 36 months . If the ex-spouse 's employer has less than 20 employees then state continuation of coverage provisions would apply but these vary from state to state and generally run for a much shorter length of time . In any event , the person who elects to continue coverage is responsible for making the entire premium payment and this payment must be submitted in a timely fashion each month or your coverage can be terminated by the employer . Divorce is a `` qualifying event '' under the health care reform law and is a circumstance that will allow you to purchase individual health insurance either through the government health insurance marketplaces or outside of the government marketplaces -LRB- directly from an insurance agent or insurance carrier -RRB- outside of the annual open enrollment period . You have a 60-day window of time after your divorce is finalized to apply for individual health insurance coverage .
No , an ex-spouse is not longer viewed as a legal dependent once the divorce is finalized . If you are covered under a group health insurance plan to which Federal COBRA guidelines apply -LRB- 20 + employee companies -RRB- then an ex-spouse can exercise their right to continue the group 's coverage for up to 36-months . Of course , the ex-spouse of the employee on the group health planis the one responsible for making the monthly premium paymentto the employer or COBRA plan administrator so payroll deduction of premium for a COBRA continuee is not done -LRB- absent a court order to that effect I would presume -RRB- . Generally the ex-spouse losing access the their former spouse 's employment based plan has to get there own health insurance . Making provisions for this is often addressed in the terms of the divorce agreement , though not as often as I would expect . Under the Affordable Care Act , divorce is a change of life status event allowing a person to purchase individual health insurance outside of the normal open enrollment period . You have 60-days after the divorce is finalized in which to purchase new coverage either on the government marketplace or in the private marketplace .
Sometimes when getting divorced one party will `` take over '' the life insurance of the other party . Their assumption is that if they make the premium payments then they will have control over the policy . This is not the case , the other party needs to sign a change of owner form . If this is not done you will be paying the premium on a policy that you have no control over . Your ex-spouse will have the legal right to change the beneficiary if he is the owner , regardless of who is paying the premiums . Also , if your life insurance policies predate your divorce and you are supposed to be the beneficiary of your ex-spouses policy -LRB- or vice versa -RRB- , you should find out if you live in a Divorce Revocation state . If so , it is very important that you update the beneficiary designations using the correct terminology . Failure to do so could be catastrophic . In a Divorce Revocation state you could be listed as the beneficiary of your ex-spouses policy but still not receive the death benefit . One simple change can avert this problem
Qualified domestic relations order is generally included in a divorce arrangement that addresses the dissolving couples qualified retirement plans . If life insurance is an asset of the qualified retirement plans , then QDRO applies . The divorce agreement may include life insurance as a settlement option , but it would be treated as a standalone item of the overall divorce arrangement .
Life insurance is a contract between an insurance company and the owner . The subject of the insurance , the insured , may be someone other than the owner . The owner is the person with the power to change the beneficiary . In a divorce settlement care should be taken to identify the owner of the insurance . Existing insurance is difficult to handle in a divorce settlement . When alimony and/or child support is involved it is often better to have the recipient of those payments purchase and own a policy of life insurance on the party paying the alimony or child support . By doing that all of the control over the policy is in the hands of the recipient , to include the power to change the beneficiary . The other major area of concern involving divorce and life insurance is company sponsored life insurance . Often this is overlooked and the intentions of the court and the desires of the beneficiary thwarted if ownership remains in the hands of the other party . The employee can merely call the HR department and changes the beneficiary to someone else .
Yes , if there is an insurable interest . In other words , will his/her passing impact your financial situation ? In many divorces we see ex-spouses as the owner of the policy with the other former spouse as the insured . Obviously both the insured an the owner will both be aware of the other 's role in this transaction . In many cases , insurance with this objective will be ordered by the divorce court , or part of the divorce settlement .
NO , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- can not be split into 2 separate 401 -LRB- k -RRB- accounts in a Divorce however , the courts can tell you that half of the funds need to be paid to your divorcing spouse . You can either withdraw the money , remember the tax implications , or find another way to get the money to the divorcing spouse . You may not have any choice . If you do liquidate , be sure to share the tax liability here . In other words , since the owner of the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will get the tax bill , be sure to have in written form the liability will be split .
The answer is yes , provided that your divorce decree stipulates so . Normally , you can not keep your ex spouse on your health insurance as they 're no longer a dependent . However , I 've seen judges award it for a specified amount of time . If your divorce is amicable and you want to do that , propose it in your divorce settlement . As long as a judge orders it , the health insurance company should have no problem with it . Be prepared to forward a copy of the court order to the company . Now , this applies to the way things have always been done with health insurance . With the Affordable Care Act , things may change . I have n't seen it come up yet , so I guess we 'll have to wait to find out .
That depends entirely upon how the child support agreement was constructed . If there is not a specific requirement in the child support agreement that the person required to provide child support is required to provide health insurance for the child -LRB- ren -RRB- then there is a very high probability that they would not be required to provide health insurance . So , if the child support judgment requires one partner to just pay `` X '' amount of dollars every month for child support and makes no mention of a requirement to provide health insurance either out of that amount or in addition to it is unlikely that without a new judgment the ex-partner would have to provide health insurance . In my experience , a good divorce attorney specifically addresses this issue in writing in the order of child support as to which parent has the responsibility for providing health insurance for dependent children and even the potential duration of this requirement and the circumstances where it might be voided -LRB- re-marriage for example -RRB- . I am sure the rules on this crucial issue vary from state to state . Any couple with children who are divorcing should have this issue of responsibility for health insurance coverage clearly spelled out in their divorce and child support agreement .
end question
start question
annuities
Is Investing In Annuities A Good Idea ?
An annuity is a unique contract . It provides for a lifetime guaranteed income . No other investment vehicle offers that feature . As a part of a retirement portfolio it is the vehicle that most likely will produce the most income per dollar saved . The problem with an annuity is that there isnt an adjustment for inflation and with the passing of time buying power can be eroded .
That is a great question ! Annuities , like any investment have benefits and risks that can make them a great investment for you , or prove to ultimately not be . They are a great way to defer money to the future and ensure payments during retirement , but they can also require that the money used to fund them be left untouched for many years . If there is a chance that you may need that money before that period ends , then an annuity might not be a good investment for you . A good advisor or agent will sit down with you , and do what is called a `` suitability '' statement with you , and from that , determine if an annuity is a safe way for you to go . I hope that helps , if you have more questions , please feel free to drop me a line . Thanks for asking !
An annuity is the only investment vehicle that can provide you with a guaranteed lifetime income . If that is your requirement , they are wonderful . Annuities have certain tax benefits that make them suitable investments for people in other situations . Generally , they are investment vehicles with a long term investment horizon .
It all depends on your risk tolerance and financial needs . Fixed annuities are well suited for a conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns . Indexed Annuities are well suited for a conservative to semi-conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns with the opportunity for a higher return than a fixed annuity . Variable Annuities are well suited for an investor who does not mind taking on the risk of loss . A person should carefully asses their risk tolerance and realistically how much loss they are willing to withstand before investing in a Variable Annuity . Annuities can be a great idea depending on your retirement savings needs .
Whether investing in annuities is a good idea or not is like any other investment , it depends on your individual situation , your objectives and risk tolerance . In Canada , deferred annuities are often referred to as Guaranteed Investment Annuities or GIA 's . They are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates or GIC 's , but since they are issued by insurance companies , GIA 's have additional features and benefits . In Canada , variable annuities are often referred to as Segregated Funds or Seg Funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but since they are issued by insurance companies have guarantees and features . The features and guarantees offered by GIA 's and Seg Funds are of special interest if you are self employed -LRB- at any age -RRB- , within 10 to 15 years of retirement OR already retired . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . More information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca
What do annuities invest in ? Well the easiest way to find out is to review the insurance company 's financial statements . This will give you a good idea of where they look to gain returns from . Usually insurance companies are risk adverse with their investment choices and tend to look for long term investments . This is also a reason they have attached such a long surrender window on annuities . The idea is to invest long term for annuities , rather than short term .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Where are annuities invested ? Well the way to find out is review the insurance company that you bought from financials . There you can get an idea of where they invest to support the annuities they sell . Usually annuities will be invested in safe investments because they have a guaranteed return . The advantage insurance companies possess is the size of the investment . When investing millions to billions they can get a better interest rate on their money compared to someone wanting to invest a few thousand .
Whether investing in annuities is a good idea or not is like any other investment , it depends on your individual situation , your objectives and risk tolerance . In Canada , deferred annuities are often referred to as Guaranteed Investment Annuities or GIA 's . They are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates or GIC 's , but since they are issued by insurance companies , GIA 's have additional features and benefits . In Canada , variable annuities are often referred to as Segregated Funds or Seg Funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but since they are issued by insurance companies have guarantees and features . The features and guarantees offered by GIA 's and Seg Funds are of special interest if you are self employed -LRB- at any age -RRB- , within 10 to 15 years of retirement OR already retired . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . More information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca
That is a great question ! They can be , a great investment , depending upon your financial situation . An agent will do what is called a `` suitability study '' with you to determine whether an annuity is right for you . The suitability study is designed to see if the investment in an annuity is a safe investment for you to make - is it financially safe , will it meet your retirement needs , and does it fall within the tolerable amount of risk that you are comfortable with . Annuities are not very flexible for a period of time when it comes to the money that you invest . There are large fees and penalties , and much damage done to the earnings potential if you need to take back money from your annuity in the first years of the contract . This period is called the `` surrender period '' , and may last as long as 10 years . That makes an annuity something that should be seriously considered only if you have some safeguards in place , and have a good cash flow . That said , if it is a suitable investment , then it can be a terrific one to make . Annuities can guarantee an income that you ca n't outlive , and with our increasing lifespans that is a great thing to have ! There are some really good annuity products out there , and the indexed ones have some great earning potential and guarantees . If there are specific questions that you have , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
What are the risks of a fixed annuity ? Well the biggest risk is `` inflation '' risk . That is the money being saved in an annuity is not earning enough to keep pace with or be ahead of inflation . Annuities purchased from financially strong companies do n't suffer some of the other risks involved with investing . Actually annuities tend to be very safe choices and as such are not strong return choices , but that is always the side effect of safe investing . For many the idea of putting their retirement money at risk of loss is too much and so annuities become good choices for them .
Whole Life insurance is not an investment , it is a way to provide an immediate estate and a systematic way to save money in a very tax favorable way . Whole life provides a sound foundation for a good investment portfolio . The amount of the Whole Life would depend on your personal goals and financial situation . While buy term and invest the difference is a great idea , the reality is that most people who buy term never follow through on investing the difference . Life happens , emergencies come up and the money that was to be invested gets used for other things . This is fact based on statistics . If you want to invest , invest . If you want insurance that will be there when you will need it most , buy Whole Life insurance . Never put all your eggs in one basket . A base of Whole Life with added term insurance for your life insurance needs and sound investments to top off the portfolio is a safe sound way to accumulate cash for retirement and providing for final expense and a legacy for your family
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
In Canada , deferred annuities are considered to be insurance policies . Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIAs -RRB- are similar to Guaranted Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- the interest and principle in both are guaranteed . An example of the Guaranteed Investment Annuity 's `` insurance element '' is the annuity or monthly income . Guaranteed Investment Funds -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , are segregated funds and are similiar to mutual funds.The funds invested in both are at risk . However , Guaranteed Investment Funds , in addition to the annuity or income element offer maturity and death guarantees of 75 % to 100 % . These investment vehicles offer benefits that could prove to be valuable . For more information please visit JPW.ca or contact me via this web site .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
That is a great question ! There are two things that could be seen as disadvantages to having a fixed rate annuity . One is inherent in all annuities , and that is the fact that the money is untouchable for several years , without paying penalties to withdraw it . If you change your mind , or feel that it was n't a good investment , it can be difficult to change without taking a hit financially . Annuities are a bad investment vehicle if you have liquidity issues . The second is that if your 're not receiving a rate that will outpace inflation and cover fees , you can actually lose money . If the guaranteed rate say , is 2 % , but the fees are 1 % and inflation is 1.5 % , you are actually losing money . The same could be said if the money invested in the annuity could have brought a higher return invested elsewhere . It 's important to really have a good advisor when looking at annuities , especially fixed ones , to ensure you get the best return possible . Thank you for asking !
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
I think that Universal Life Insurance is a good idea for those who want permanent coverage , but do n't care whether or not their policy has much cash value . You can buy guaranteed no lapse UL policies at very competitive prices that are like that . Indexed Universal Life can be a good choice for younger , healthy persons wanting to use their life insurance policy as a type of investment . IUL uses the stock market to generate what could be higher than normal cash value . But it can not go below zero gains , so if safer than playing the market . Finally , getting Universal Life at an older age , when the premiums are comparative to Term , is a good idea . UL gives you more flexibility so that you can decrease the face amount , increase or decrease the premium , and increase or decrease the duration of the policy very easily .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can My Girlfriend Be On My Car Insurance ?
If she drives your car on a regular basis or lives with you then you should consider adding her as a driver . Just remember however that her driving record can affect your insurance rates if you do so . If for any reason her driving record is badly blemished then I suggest having her obtain her own policy .
In California the determination is that the car is attached to a household . If your girlfriend is also a member of your household , she not only can , but she must be a listed driver or excluded from the policy . If she doesnt live with you and operates your car with your permission , your insurance continues to cover the car . However , you are still responsible for the outcome and if she has an accident it could lead to an increase in your premium .
Wow , people keep asking this question . Does n't anybody get married anymore ? No , you ca n't add your girlfriend to your healthinsurance , she 's not a legal dependent . Girlfriends and boyfriends have a tendency to come into and then drift out of our lives . That 's why they are referred to as friends . Husbands and wives on the other hand have this certain `` stickiness '' and tend to hang around for a long time . Maybe even until death do you part . The bottom line is if you think so highly of your girlfriend that you want to put her on your health insurance then it 's time to make it legal . Of course , now in the era of ObamaCare even marrying her may not be a guarantee you can add her to your employer 's health insurance . Interestingly enough , ObamaCare did n't bother to define spouses as dependents -LRB- I did n't make the law folks I just inform people about it -RRB- and so with health insurance rates skyrocketing you are seeing increasing numbers of employers requiring spouses who are employed at another company that offers health insurance to enroll in their employer 's plan . And a few have gone all in on that interpretation of the law and are n't covering spouses at all -LRB- still pretty rare -RRB- . But , in general , you have to be married to your girlfriend to cover her as a dependent on your health insurance .
It 's quite simple really , you get MARRIED . This change of life status event makes your new spouse a legally eligible dependent that you can add onto your coverage at your employer or to your individual health insurance policy . You have 60-days after getting married to make this change to your coverage . If you are covered by employer based coverage you can double check on this with your personnel department . While I 've never seen it in my nearly 30 years in the business , there may be some self-insured employer out there that has established an internal personnel policy that allows for the coverage of `` boyfriends '' and `` girlfriends '' . But these more casual relationships do not have the same legal recognition that establishes a true dependent status such as with a husband , wife or children . It is highly unlikely that your state 's insurance regulations and/or your employer 's personnel policies will confer true dependent status on this level of relationship .
In California the determination is that the car is attached to a household . If your girlfriend is also a member of your household , she not only can , but she must be a listed driver or excluded from the policy . If she doesnt live with you and operates your car with your permission , your insurance continues to cover the car . However , you are still responsible for the outcome and if she has an accident it could lead to an increase in your premium .
As I also agree with my colleagues in most accounts in this situation , the big issue also is you stated that you titled and registered the vehicle in BOTH names , which means if something catastrophic happened driving that vehicle -LRB- NJ Law -RRB- and you were not listed as a driver/named insured , that you would not be protected under the liability portion of the policy because you are not listed , plain & simple . In NJ , if a vehicle is titled in a person 's name , you have `` insurable interest '' and also need to be listed to have that protection cover you . I personally never recommend joint ownership outside of marriage , especially on a financed or leased vehiclefor the simple reason that if anything happened to the relationship , and that loan or lease is defaulted , it will affect your credit rating/score which ultimately will affect your insurance premiums with most insurance companies ! In NJ , we would put the vehicle in your girlfriends name at minimum , and list you as a driver ; you would get a multi-car discount , wemakesure we cross all the t 's , and dot the i 's , because insurance is a waste of money if it does n't cover you ; in our state they can now deny the claim due to fraud committed , and they are now allowed to keep your premium too ! Be honest , because insurance when done properly can be the difference between sleeping good at night , or wondering how you will protect yourself from an untimely lawsuit that could end up in detached wages , etc. . Again , this is NJ info , you will need to check your particular states laws for coverage benefits , exclusions , etc. .
No , Colorado does not require health insurance companies to allow someone to join an insurance policy just because they are in a relationship . However , your girlfriend can purchase a policy on her own , and you could help pay the premiums if you would like . Ultimately , in the vast majority of cases , the cost of her coverage would the same whether she was added to your policy or if you purchased the exact same plan for her individually . In that regard , there really would not be any advantage at all to adding her to your plan .
No . A boyfriend or girlfriend does not meet the legal criteria for being considered an eligible dependent -LRB- you can imagine how complicated that could getin some people 's lives -RRB- . Legally married spouses are still generally considered eligible dependents though that coverage option is evolving rapidly due to a quirk in the health care reform law that does not define spouses as dependents . Natural born and step-children and individuals for which a person has a court order appointing them as legal guardian also qualify as dependents . I 'm afraid you 'll have to get married if you want to get covered under your boyfriend 's health insurance .
Great question ! Unfortunately , I would need a little more information from you . Are you talking same sex partner ? If so , that would depend upon whether the state you live in recognizes same sex relationships , and the providers stand on the issue . If you are talking common law partner , that also depends upon your State 's recognizing of common law marriages . If you are talking boyfriend or girlfriend , it may be wiser for them to get their own policy , and you make the payments . I hope that helps , if you would like more information , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Technically , you have to be domestic partners . Here is a link to the definition of domestic partner in CA along as well as the registry ... WEBSITELINK Having said that , I do n't think there 's any particular advantage to having your girlfriend on your plan . You do n't get a better price , plus you 'd both have to meet your individual deductibles . If you are , in fact , domestic partners , there may be some subsidy implications . But again , there 's not much that you 'll gain by being on the same policy together .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
Insurance follows the car . You can add any member of your household to your policy . You can loan your car to anyone you please . If your girlfriend did n't live with you and was in an accident while operating your car with your permission , she would be covered to the limits of your policy .
No , not really . If you are talking about the individual health insurance market then your freedom of movement has been severely restricted by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . So , outside of the annual open enrollment period each year you can only change your health insurance coverage if you experience a change of life status event or special election period as defined under ObamaCare . Some examples are getting married or divorced , having a child or moving to another state or outside your current carrier 's service area in your state . Similar restrictions apply if you are covered under a group health plan that offers multiple options or one of the new private health insurance exchanges that some companies are moving to . An increasingly common situation that many consumers are being or will be faced with is finding out that their favorite physician is no longer participating in the provider network of the health insurance plan they enrolled in . Cancelling your coverage to switch to a new insurance carrier in mid-year that does have your doctor as an in-network provider wo n't meet the criteria for a change of life status event or a special election period . You could cancel your old coverage but you would have to wait until the next open enrollment period and the first of the year to get new individual health insurance . Failure to pay your monthly insurance premium is also not a qualifying event and can leave you out in the cold until the next enrollment period so do n't think about that as a strategy to change insurance carriers in mid-stream . While this was tied into a continuation of coverage under COBRA issue , I recently witnessed a heartbreaking example of this situation . I received a frantic call from the girlfriend of a man who has terminal cancer . At first she was unsure as to his last day of being covered under his employer 's plan and whether he had continued his coverage under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . In fact , the initial information she gave me was that he had not continued his group coverage and was still within the 60-day window that a person has to purchase individual coverage after losing their employer based coverage . If this had been the case , even though the man was being treated for terminal cancer I would have been able to enroll him in major medical coverage that would have had to cover his care immediately . After digging into this man 's situation more deeply we discovered that he had elected to continue his coverage under his former employer 's plan , had paid the first month 's premium by check but had then failed to make his second month 's premium payment and had his COBRA coverage cancelled due to non-payment . The fact that this man was undergoing intensive chemo & radiation therapy and being given massive doses of pain medications made it understandable as to how he missed making that second premium payment but that did n't stop the COBRA plan administrator from terminating him for non-payment . Unfortunately , as cancellation of coverage for non-payment of premium is not a qualifying event the individual major medical carriers were within their rights to decline him for coverage until the next open enrollment period and coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . This has left the man uninsured at the worst possible time and has his friends and family raising money for his care . If he is still alive by the first of the year I 'll be able to get him coverage but his life expectancy is not that great but the bills he is accumulating are .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
That is a great question ! The answer will depend upon your company , and the policy restrictions . It may cover for a specified number of days , it may cover until the repairs to your vehicle are completed . A couple of years ago my car was hit , and the driver at faults insurance covered my rental car . After a week , they notified me that they were no longer going to cover the rental car , and it would be my expense . My car was n't finished , and the insurance company had not been in a hurry to see it get finished . After discussing the situation with them , they agreed to pay until my car was completed . They were n't happy , but were liable . If you would like some details on that discussion , contact me , and I 'll share them with you . Thanks for asking !
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
Additions to your health insurance policy are usually limited to family members such as spouses or children . Therefore , you would not be able to put your girlfriend on your health insurance . She could get an individual health insurance policy on her own that would help to cover her medical expenses .
Some carriers will allow you to add your girlfriend to your auto insurance policy provided that she lives at the same address as you . Contact your local agent to find out more details about coverage availability and pricing within your geographic area . Some carriers may require each of you to have your own auto policies if you are not married .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is There Medicaid Or Medigap To Help With Medicare Payouts ?
Absolutely !! There are Medicare Supplements offered through private insurance companies like Humana and Aetna that will help pay some of the costs not covered by Original Medicare or some supplements like a Plan F that covers everything that Medicare does not cover except of course prescription drugs . You still need a Part D prescription drug plan . The cost for a Medigap or a Medicare supplement can range from $ 50.00 to $ 350.00 at age 65 depending on the level of coverage you would like.Open enrollment which allows you to move in and out of these plans is Oct 15 to Dec 7th every year . Another option is getting a Medicare Advantage Plan , which is also offered by private insurance companies but most of the time there are plans available with a $ 0.00 monthly premium in addition to what they already take out of your check for part B. Instead of paying 20 % like Medicare , you pay low or no co-pays when you seek medical services . There are usually no deductibles on a Medicare Advantage Plan either . For more info please visit : rocoinsurance.com/medicare-products.html
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
You can , but this is actually pretty rare . It is illegal for any agent to sell you a Medigap policy if they know you are on Medicaid . This is asked on every Medigap insurance application , so if answered truthfully , you would generally not be able to purchase a Medigap policy . Some Medicare beneficiaries purchase a Medigap policy , and then at some future point become eligible for Medicaid . Since Medicaid essentially provides the benefits provided by the Medigap policy , the Medicare/Medicaid beneficiary may suspend their Medigap policy for as long as they are on Medicaid . They technically still have Medigap , but in a suspended status .
No . If you have full Medicaid assistance you no longer need a Medigap Supplement policy . Everything that is not covered by Medicare will be covered by Medicaid . However you should make sure you are on full Medicaid . There are some people who get Medicaid assistance that pays their Medicare Part B Premium and RX assistance but does not pay their Medicare co-pays or deductibles .
Yes . Eligibility rules for Medicaid is going to vary by state . Medicaid can help pay for services and costs that Medicare does n't cover . When you have both programs , Medicare pays first and Medicaid will pay second.If you qualify for Medicaid in your state , you automatically qualify for extra help paying for your Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage .
Yes . Eligibility rules for Medicaid is going to vary by state . Medicaid can help pay for services and costs that Medicare does n't cover . When you have both programs , Medicare pays first and Medicaid will pay second . If you qualify for Medicaid in your state , you automatically qualify for extra help paying for your Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To clarify your question - are you asking for a statistical figure as to how many specific claims were made for chiropractic services ? Or are you asking if chiropractic services are covered by Medicare ? If you 're looking for statistical data , I would suggest contacting CMS -LRB- the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- or Medicare for help determining that figure - insurance agents would be very unlikely to have that data available for a specific type of claim on hand -LRB- I myself do not -RRB- . If you 're looking for input regarding if chiropractic services can be covered by Medicare , then the answer would be it depends . Medicare part B may cover some chiropractic services if they are deemed medically necessary to correct a subluxation in the spine . If it 's not deemed medically necessary , then it would n't be covered . If you have a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare Supplement plan -RRB- , the plan would only pay their portion of services if Medicare approves the claim . If Medicare does n't approve it , then the Medigap plan wo n't be able to approve the charge . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Medigap is a supplemental health insurance policy that can be purchased to go along with Medicare Part A and Part B . It is used to cover the costs that Medicare does not cover . Medigap does not fit in with Medicaid as Medicaid covers all medical costs and does not have the `` gaps '' of coverage that Medicare does .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicaid does n't actually `` take '' your life insurance . You just ca n't qualify for Medicaid assistance if you have more countable assets than Medicaid allows . In most states $ 2,000 is the total allowed to qualify for Medicaid assistance . Checking and savings accounts , retirement money , cash value of life insurance , etc. all count against you when qualifying for Medicaid . Many people will cash surrender their life insurance to qualify for Medicaid . You can also irrevocably assign it to your funeral home and it will be exempt but must be all used for funeral expenses if you do that . An actual funeral preplan life insurance policy that you purchase from a funeral home is always exempt from Medicaid .
In Canada , there are two basic types of immediate -LRB- payout -RRB- annuities , term certain and life annuities . Term certain annuities payout over a specified term and then stop . Life annuities payout over the lifetime of the annuitant -LRB- can be joint life -RRB- . Life annuities can also include a guaranteed payout option . Life annuities are only available from life insurance companies . Term certain annuities are available from available from life insurance companies and other financial institutions including banks and trust companies.There are a number of different options to consider when purchasing an annuity too numerous to cover here . You would be best served by working with an independent insurance broker who can help you find the right plan . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Lifeline Covered By Medicare ?
Medicare does not cover medical alert systems , even if you have a doctor 's note / prescription . Most insurance companies wo n't cover them either . Some states may have their own programs that will help provide financial assistance for medical alert systems - certain criteria may be required to be met before the financial assistance can be provided however .
Medicare supplemental insurance can be a financial lifeline for most people . Medicare Part A and Part B only cover about 80 % of approved charges . This can leave you owing many thousands of dollars and there is no cap on your out of pocket . Medicare supplemental insurance plans allow you to decide how much risk you are willing to accept . The most popular plans will reduce your financial obligation to less than $ 500 per year .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Medicare can cover INR testing once a month when certain conditions are met . Typically you 'll need to consult with your doctor and have them determine if it is medically necessary and confirm with Medicare that the treatment course will be covered -LRB- would fall under Part B - your physician insurance for outpatient procedures -RRB- . Here 's a link to a publication from CMS -LRB- the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- that provides a detailed explanation regarding INR testing , what specific conditions must be met to have it covered , and how Medicare covers it : WEBSITELINK Please note , under Medicare Part B , only 80 % of the expense would be covered by Medicare . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan , it may cover some or all of the other 20 % -LRB- depending on the plan letter you have -RRB- of the service expenses . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement , please feel free to contact me to see about qualifying for one . Medicare Supplement plans are standardized , meaning the benefits are exactly the same regardless of which insurance carrier you have the coverage through -LRB- only the price is different ! -RRB- Even if you already have a Medicare Supplement plan , I can take a quick look to see if a lower monthly premium is available -LRB- takes less than 5 minutes and I may be able to save you a ton of money on your monthly premium -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is very comprehensive health coverage for those that qualify . Medicare will cover a Total Knee Replacement as long as the Physician , Hospital , and any other healthcare providers are deemed as providers . You can check each provider out on the Medicare.gov website . Medicare Part A would cover the hospital expenses and if a Skilled Nursing Facility is needed for rehabilitation . You will have a deductible if you only have Medicare A and B . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of the out of pocket costs . Medicare Part B would cover the Physician charges and any outpatient services required . You have an annual deductible and 20 % coinsurance . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of these our to pocket cost . Medicare Advantage plans have daily charges and copays that vary for every plan . You should check with the plan to confirm that the providers are in their network and determine what your costs might be .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
When To Buy Disability Insurance ?
The time to buy disability insurance is when you start earning a full time income , if your employer does not provide group disability coverage . If you have enough saved up to survive three months off of work , all you will need to purchase is a long term disability insurance policy .
When you secure a full time , you should seriously consider buying long term disability insurance to protect your family members from the loss of income due to a ongoing sickness or recovery from injury . Disability insurance benefits generate a tax free stream of monthly income based on your annual compensation . The benefits begin after you have satisfied the waiting or elimination period .
If you are working at least 30 hours per week , you should seriously consider purchasing disability insurance . The average person 's savings would only last them 6 months if they were unable to work . To protect your savings , your family , your assets , etc. , you should protect your paycheck .
Right Peggy !! The `` death benefit '' inside a disability policy is usually limited to a few months worth of the `` Monthly Benefit '' . So if your benefit is $ 3,000 a month , then you might get 3 , 6 , maybe 9 thousand in a death benefit . LOOK AT THE LANGUAGE . Does it pay ONLY AFTER you have met an elimination period or is it an immediate benefit ? Disability is a very important plan to own . Yet , I know that buying life insurance , buying disability , buying long term care , buying critical illness , & then buying home , auto , umbrella , & more can be very overwhelming ... . You might consider buying a Living benefits & / or Hybrid Life insurance plan ... These are life insurance plans that you can use BEFORE you die . I have a massage therapist that owns a plan with a death benefit , a $ 30,000 critical illness benefit , and has a $ 1000 a month disability benefit . She pays about $ 43 month for all of this . PERFECT for single mom with a modest income . YES ... standalone Disability has more features and better terms ... yet the all in one plan allows her to cover a critical illness , a disability , & early death . Reach out with questions :--RRB- - gravy
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are a number of disability insurance companies out there such as Guardian , MetLife , Mutual of Omaha , Principal , and Standard , just to name a few . The cost of disability insurance depends on a number of factors including your age , medical history , your job , and your income level . Disability policies are very customizable as they feature a number of riders and other options that can affect the premium for the policy . This is a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about and not something you want to be cheap about . It protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . This is a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about and not something you want to be cheap about . It protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . It protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . This is a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . It protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
If you have to choose between buying short or long term disability insurance , most people select long term disability insurance . That is because most people can survive a few months of not having an income , but it is difficult for most people to go without their paycheck for many months or years . If you are trying to decide whether to buy any disability insurance at all , it depends on your income -LRB- whether your family depends on it -RRB- , your health and occupation -LRB- whether you qualify for a policy -RRB- , and the cost of the policy -LRB- whether you can afford it -RRB- . If you are living on minimum wage , buying long term disability insurance is not going to fit in your budget . If you are the breadwinner in your family , do n't have a large amount of savings , and have a moderate to good standard of living , it is almost essential to do long term disability insurance .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the MOST favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the worst definition as you must meet more requirements than a true own occupation or modified own occupation to receive a benefit payout . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately with a true own occupation or modified own occupation policy or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own . This is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes . Many individuals will set up a short term disability policy as well as a long-term disability policy to cover different types of scenarios -LRB- e.g. if you become permanently disabled vs. being temporarily disabled -RRB- . Some individuals will have a group DI policy through an employer and supplement it with an individual DI policy if they feel the group DI does n't provide enough benefits or a very good `` definition of disability '' -LRB- the most important factor with DI coverage -RRB- - when buying disability insurance , make sure of -LRB- and understand -RRB- the definition of disability that 's being cited in the program -LRB- own occupation , modified , or gainful - this is the most important factor in your disability policy as it will determine if you are eligible for a claim when something happens -RRB- . Please note , disability insurance policies coordinate benefits so there 's a limit to how much coverage and what kind you can secure -LRB- most carriers will keep it to a maximum of 70 % of income - the percentage can vary by insurance company -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help setting up coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you buy disability insurance , you 're generally going to want to keep it for your entire working life or until age 65 -LRB- when most policies expire - there 's generally a hefty increase in premium to keep it beyond age 65 for policies that offer the option -RRB- , whichever comes first . The purpose of disability insurance is to protect your ability to work and provide an income for you and your family when you 're physically unable to do so . You may want to consider replacing your disability insurance with another disability policy if the new one offers better coverage -LRB- including a better definition of disability - e.g. the true own occupation -RRB- and/or a more affordable rate . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does 10 Year Term Life Insurance Mean ?
10 year term life insurance means that the policy will stay the same price for 10 years , then either end , or jump way up in price . Some policies offer a rider to extend the policy beyond 10 years at an additional cost . Normally , after the 10 years of a 10 year term life insurance policy are up , the insured person must apply for a new policy at rates appropriate to their older age and health at that time . Or else they may be able to convert their policy to permanent insurance before the 10 year term ends . The permanent insurance is guaranteed to have the same health rating as the term did , and priced according to the age of the insured at the time of conversion .
A 10 year life insurance policy means you have a policy providing you with 10 years of coverage , a death benefit . In most cases the premium is guaranteed for the initial 10 years . After 10 years , the policy may revert to an annual renewable meaning the premium is not guaranteed . Please so your homework before purchasing a 10 year life insurance policy . I run into people all the time who have a 10 year where they are near the end of the term and need more or longer coverage . Look at a longer term , up to 30 years and lock in your premium for that term . ; It all comes down to what you are trying to accomplish . If your goal is for only 10 years or less , then this policy maybe perfect for your needs .
This refers to a term life insurance policy and the time period that the policy at the quoted rates would remain in effect . As its name implies , term life insurance , runs for a stated period of time -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 year terms -RRB- . If at the end of that time period the policy holder has not died then the policy ends and the insurance carrier keeps all premiums paid during the life of the policy . A 10-Year Term Life policy means a policy that will cover the policyholder for a period of 10-years at the rates quoted or subject to whatever rate terms as associated with the policy . For example , a person might purchasea $ 50,000 10-year Term Life Insurance policy which would mean that if the policyholder kept their policy paid up and died during that 10-year coverage period the life insurance company would pay $ 50,000 to the person 's beneficiary . Term life insurance is the least expensive form of life insurance and builds up no cash value as opposed to permanent life insurance which is more expensive . Many people use a combination of term and permanent life insurance to protect them and their families for the financial risk of the death of the policyholder at different stages in their life . For example , a man in his 40 's with a mortgage and children getting ready for college may have need for more life insurance than he will when he is 65 , retired and an empty nester . Proper structuring of a life insurance portfolio over the course of a person 's life can help achieve this goal most cost effectively .
Yes in many ways . The most common method for using life insurance as an investment is through Indexed Universal Life policies . 1 . You are looking for an alternative to CD or Money Market accounts with historically low rates of return . 2 . You want better growth than those accounts , let ` s say 4-6 % on average net of any fees . 3 . You want that growth to be on tax-deferred basis . 4 . You want our money to be totally safe from market losses . For example , if you purchase a mutual fund at $ 100,000 , and it grows 10 % in the first year , your account would reach approximately $ 110,000 . However , if the following year nets you a 40 % loss , your account would only be at $ 66,000 . If your third year produced a 10 % rate of return , youd still be below your original investment at $ 72,600 minus fees and expenses . However , in an Indexed IUL the reset every year means you never earn less than zero . So , if you put $ 100,000 in a single premium Indexed IUL and receive 10 % growth your first year , your end result is $ 110,000 . Continuing the hypothetical scenario , say the markets drops 40 % in the second year . Youll lose nothing . After your second year , your account will still be at $ 110,000 . In the third year , your account grows 10 % , which means youll have $ 121,000 minus fees and expenses . So what you get is a potential for upside of the market with no downside risk . Generally the floor is 0 % and the cap is 15 % . That means that if the S&P index gains 10 % for a year your will get 10 % into your contract minus fees . If the index moves 20 % you will only get 15 % . This is the cap that means that you can not get credited more than that . But if the index loses 10 % you will not lose anything . Your contract will get 0 % for that year minus policy fees . In a properly structured policy fees are usually around 2 % . Historically , in properly structured IUL policies cash values grow on average 7-8 % annually . If you deduct around 2 % for policy fees you may net 5-6 % annually . Again , all of your money is liquid from day one , principle and interest . It grows tax-deferred and there is no market risk , but there is a chance for a market gain up to 13-15 % annually minus fees . Also , since it is a life insurance policy you will get other benefits . A fairly healthy 65 year old would get over $ 200,000 of tax free death benefit with a $ 100,000 single premium payment . Many of these policies have additional benefits like Terminal Illness rider and Chronic Illness rider included . These are called Living Benefits , which allow you to use a bigger portion of the death benefit when you get terminally or chronically sick .
10 year term life insurance means that the policy will stay the same price for 10 years , then either end , or jump way up in price . Some policies offer a rider to extend the policy beyond 10 years at an additional cost . Normally , after the 10 years of a 10 year term life insurance policy are up , the insured person must apply for a new policy at rates appropriate to their older age and health at that time . Or else they may be able to convert their policy to permanent insurance before the 10 year term ends . The permanent insurance is guaranteed to have the same health rating as the term did , and priced according to the age of the insured at the time of conversion .
A 10-year term life insurance policy is a level benefit term life insurance policy that states that the premiums will remain fixed and guaranteed for 10 years . Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . After the initial period of premium guarantee expires -LRB- the term period -RRB- , the policy will be annually renewable and premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- . 10-year term policies seem like a great deal because they typically offer the lowest possible premiums for a given amount of coverage . One of the main reasons to buy longer is to protect your insurability and pay a small amount for a longer time instead of securing a new policy when you 're 10 years older and your health has changed . Creating a combination of benefits can often be a great idea -LRB- e.g. having part term and part permanent coverage or having part 10 year term , part 20 year term , etc. -RRB- Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Term length in life insurance means the number of years that the policy will stay in effect at the same premium . E.g. . A 10 year Term policy will stay at the same price for 10 years ; a 30 year Term policy is assumed to stay at the same price for 30 years . However , some policies will guarantee that the premium stays the same for part of the term and does not guarantee that it will stay the same for the remainder of the term . It is important to make sure that your premium is guaranteed not to go up for the entire term , whether that be 10 , 20 , 30 years or some other term length .
The cheapest life insurance is usually annually renewable term , followed by 10 year term . Annually renewable term goes up in price every year , and 10 year term goes up in price every 10 years . Some companies carry 5 year term , but there are so few choices that 10 year term rates often beat the rates of 5 year term . Whether that type of short term policy is best for you depends on your need for the life insurance . E.g. . If you are purchasing it to pay for your funeral , you run the very real risk of being unable to afford the policy by the time you die . In that case , buying permanent insurance is usually a better choice , even if it starts out costing more . However , if you only need your policy for a few years , getting a short term policy is most likely your best and cheapest choice .
Short term life insurance is generally thought of as term life insurance that comes in terms of 1 , 5 or 10 years . One year Term , or Annually Renewable Term , can be helpful for someone in between jobs or some other need for very short term coverage . However , one year Term will go up in price each year , and sometimes you need to re-qualify every year . So locking in a longer term is much easier and more cost effective if you need more than a couple years of coverage . Five year Term is hard to find , and thus the prices are not as competitive as one would think . I have found that ten year Term rates often run as low or lower than five year Term . Since there is no penalty to drop Term life insurance , you may as well take the longer term and then just drop it if you do n't need it the whole ten years . Ten year Term policies are common and competitively priced . Again , if you need longer coverage , it can cost less to lock the rate in longer while you are younger and your health is good . But if you are going for short term coverage , 10 or 15 year Term can be a good way to go .
Thirty years certainly could be enough to save for retirement . The total amount you need to save in today 's dollars depends largely on what retirement success means to you . Once you have a basic idea , you can determine what is needed to fund your desired lifestyle . Deciding what you want to do 30 years from now is quite difficult so using the `` standard '' 70 % of current income is a good starting point . Once you are within 10-15 years , you should start fine tuning your retirement plan to get things aligned . NOTE : The rule of compound interest 72 interest rate = the number of years it takes for the funds to double . For example 72 10 % = 7.2 . That means at 10 % interest your money doubles every 7.2 years . Therefore , the earlier you start the better . More information on what you ought to know about protecting and growing your Nest Egg can be found at WEBSITELINK If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Ten Year level Term Life Insurance is life insurance that will not go up in price for 10 years . It may have the option to be extended beyond that time , but the premium will be much higher when the 10 year term is complete . It does not have any cash value . Some 10 year level Term can be converted to a permanent policy with out evidence of insurability -LRB- no health questions asked -RRB- for some or all of the 10 years .
A 10 year life level term life insurance policy gives the individual 10 years of protection with the premium remaining the same for those years . At the end of the period if you feel you still need coverage then it can be renewed for another 10 years with either the same face amount or a lesser face amount . The premium , of course would be higher for the second 10 years . Most of the term insurance that I write is for 20 to 30 years , the average being 20 years . But , if it is a budgetary issue then I will write a 10 year or a 15 year at the needed face amount in lieu of cutting the face amount .
Annual renewable term life insurance means that the premiums for a policy are not guaranteed and will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- by a good margin -LRB- often a substantial increase -RRB- even though you can technically keep it going til the coverage end date -LRB- e.g. 95 -RRB- . In short , you likely would not keep the policy going beyond the first couple years -LRB- if at all -RRB- due to the sheer expense of the program . When you 're buying term life insurance , you want to set up a policy that features a level term guarantee -LRB- meaning you 're paying the same premium for a set number of years - e.g. 10 years , 15 , years , 20 years , 25 years , or 30 years -RRB- . The longer the term guarantee , the better -LRB- even though it does cost more to secure a longer term guarantee , it can provide much more cost savings over time the longer you live -RRB- . If you want to guarantee the premium remain fixed and guaranteed for the rest of your life , you would want to set up a permanent insurance policy -LRB- either a universal life or whole life poilcy , depending on coverage needs -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Just as the name sounds , a 5 year term insurance policy only guarantees the premiums will remain the same for the first 5 years - after that the policy becomes annually renewable and the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- . Many companies feature a minimum 10 year policy and the rates are often cheaper to secure a 10 year term policy than a 5 year policy . Term life insurance guarantees the premiums will remain fixed for a specific number of years -LRB- 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . Once the initial period of premium guarantee expires , the program changes to either annual renewable term insurance with premiums increasing each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- or the premiums remain the same and the death benefit decreases each year -LRB- this structure is commonly seen on term insurance that is featured on a universal life chassis -RRB- .
The term is the duration of time that the coverage lasts . If you have a 10 year term , that means that the coverage and premium are guaranteed for 10 years . Term insurance comes in 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 and 30 year terms . At the end of the term , you may be able to convert your policy to permanent insurance or continue the insurance , but at a much higher premium .
Term Life Insurance is life insurance that pays out the death benefit if the insured person dies during the term of the policy . E.g. . If you buy a 10 year term life insurance policy on yourself , it would pay your beneficiary the death benefit if you died in the next 10 years . Regular life insurance can mean different things to different people . Back in our grandparents ' day , regular life insurance meant Whole Life . Whole Life is life insurance that stays in effect for the entire lifetime of the insured person . It also has cash value that people can borrow from or use before death . In modern times , regular life insurance can mean whatever you are familiar with . When you hear ads on TV or radio , they are usually quoting Term Life -LRB- with the exception of burial policies - they are usually quoting Whole Life -RRB- . You will want to ask for clarification before buying any policy , so that you get the type of life insurance that you truly want .
Paid up life-insurance means you dont make anymore payments on the policy . You still get the coverage , but you no longer have to pay for it . But heres the question : suppose you wanted to keep paying ? Why wouldnt the insurance company allow you to do so ? I mean , some of these permanent insurance policies can get very cash rich . Whole life policies can pay some pretty hefty dividends . Universal life policies can apply a pretty decent interest rate . As I am sure you have heard , there can be some great tax advantages to accumulating wealth inside life insurance : tax-deferred accumulation , and , under the right circumstances , tax-free distributions . So why wouldnt an insurance company just let you go for it ? A number of decades ago , they did . People were taking out policies with face amounts of $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 , but putting huge amounts of cash into them . Huge amounts . They really milked the tax advantages of the product . Of course , the IRS got wise to this and imposed certain rules . These rules limit the amount of money that can grow inside these policies and still avoid taxation . You can exceed this limit , but then you get a tax bill . From this point of view , paid up means if you put more cash into the policy , you could create a taxable event . It also means something else , in consideration of the expenses of the policy . Lets say you take out a universal life product with a guarantee to age 100 . This means that given the proper payment schedule , both the premium and the death benefit will be guaranteed to a age 100 . The emphasis is on the payment schedule . If you meet it , then no more payments would be required to secure those guarantees . It would be paid up . Whats interesting here is that , depending on the product , a lot of flexibility exists for designing a payment schedule . You can have continuous pay and simply pay the lowest amount required annually . You could have a single pay in which just one payment in the first year will get you what you want . You could have a 10 pay , which means you just pay for 10 years - and still get the guarantees . You could have 20 pay . And so on . Depending on your cash flow and other factors , you could pay up your policy with any number of strategies . And then you simply would not have to worry about paying for your life insurance , even though you would have the coverage for as long as you need . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Neither is ` best ' in terms of comparing one against the other . What you need to look at is what you are going to count on this insurance plan for and why you need it . Term insurance is better for covering large amounts for shorter periods of time , such as putting a policy in place to ensure your children -LRB- or grandchildren -RRB- will have money for college should something happen to you prior to them completing college . Or you could set up a policy that would pay off your mortgage and/or other debts so you do n't leave those behind in the event something happens prior to them being paid off . Whole Life insurance is better for establishing long term wealth accumulation . Here 's an example of the way I set up one of my customers . Since it is possible to have multiple policies , we set up a 10 year term policy listingtheir children as beneficiaries to guarantee they have money for college . We also calculated how much income they would potentially earn during that 10 year period and included that amount so their spouse was n't left without income . Then we set upa 20 year term policy equal to the amount of theirhome mortgage so that would be paid off and calculated who much income they would earn during this next 10 year period.Finally , we establisheda whole life policy witha small face valueto help establishan estate for theirheirs . Since the whole life policy pays out the face value or the cash value , whichever is higher , the ` death benefit ' of the whole life policy increased as time went on . We also established that when the 10 year policy expired , if their income level permitted , they would continue making those monthly payments , but they would add that to the Whole Life policy . Doing this dramatically increased the cash accumulation of that policy after the 10 year mark . So my recommendation for you is to meet with a qualified insurance agent or financial planner to establish the right scenario for you and your family .
5 Year Term Life Insurance has the premiums locked in for 5 years . People who have a short term loan are the most common seekers of of 5 year Term that I see . In reality , the cost of 5 year Term is often higher than 10 year Term because there are so few companies that offer five year Term Life Insurance . When you buy Term Life , you can drop it at any time without penalty . So getting 10 year Term may be your better choice .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can The IRS Levy Life Insurance Proceeds ?
Once constructive receipt of life insurance proceeds enter the beneficiaries account , it becomes an asset . If the IRS levies the account , the life insurance funds are commingled with the other funds in the accounts and can be collected . It important for beneficiaries to remain unencumbered with financial liabilities , especially when they may be receiving life insurance proceeds .
In 2000 the IRS started the Federal Payment Levy Program . Through this program the IRS collects overdue taxes by taking money from a variety of sources . The cost of Medicare is a tax and it appears that the IRS can take that money from other entitlements that you might receive . You do have some rights under this act which you should review . Additional information is available on the IRS website .
Once constructive receipt of life insurance proceeds enter the beneficiaries account , it becomes an asset . If the IRS levies the account , the life insurance funds are commingled with the other funds in the accounts and can be collected . It important for beneficiaries to remain unencumbered with financial liabilities , especially when they may be receiving life insurance proceeds .
I presume you are asking about the individual mandate requirement of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and the tax penalty associated with not having health insurance or health insurance that meets the requirements of the Affordable Care Act . The term `` levy '' is technically inaccurate as that is an assessment applied to a population in general . Persons without health insurance in 2014 will be subject to a tax penalty when they file their 2014 tax returns in 2015 . The penalty for being uninsured in 2014 will be $ 95 per adult and $ 47.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 285 per household -RRB- or 1 % of their Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- , whichever is greater . The tax penalty for being uninsured in 2015 will increase to $ 325 per adult and $ 162.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 975 per household -RRB- or 2 % of their MAGI , whichever is greater . If you persist in being uninsured in 2016 the tax penalty jumps to $ 695 per adult and $ 347.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 2085 per household -RRB- or 2.5 % of MAGI , whichever is greater . In subsequent years the tax penalty will be adjusted upward by the inflation rate . As the law is currently constructed , the tax penalties described above can only be collected by the IRS from any income tax refund that the taxpayer would have received . The IRS can not bill the taxpayer for the penalty , place a lien on their assets or criminally prosecute the taxpayer . Obviously , this means that an uninsured person 's tax penalty on paper and what their true penalty -LRB- if any -RRB- might be will be directly related to whether they are eligible for a tax refund . So , a person 's ability to structure their tax withholding during the course of the year , or in the case of self-employed persons making estimated tax payments , so that they have little or no refund or owe additional taxes when filing their tax return may largely negate or eliminate the tax penalty for being uninsured .
The Internal Revenue Service under IRC Section 6331 has the authority to seize retirement accounts to satisfy federal taxes owed by plan participants in specific scenarios . In general terms , the IRS will mail Forms 668-W or Forms 668-A , which is a notice of levy , to the retirement plan administrator to seize assets . It is extremely important to engage a tax attorney or enrolled agent to represent your interests in a dispute with the Service .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
A Medicare levy surcharge is levied against taxpayers in Australia who do not take out private hospital insurance , and who earn above a certain income . The Medicare levy is intended to encourage Australian citizens to take our private cover and use the private system to lessen the burden on Medicare .
Medicare will assess a higher premium -LRB- surcharge or levy -RRB- in a couple of different situations . Medicare Part B premiums may carry a levy based on your income . Congress decided higher income people should pay more for their Medicare coverage . The surcharge varies and is based on your income tax return from 2 years prior . There is also a late enrollment penalty that may apply if you fail to enroll in Part B on a timely basis .
There are two , or possibly three , types of Medicare levy or surcharge that may apply . Medicare Part B will assess a surcharge on your Part B premium if your earnings exceed a threshold as determined by Congress . There is also a late enrollment penalty for Part B if you fail to sign up on a timely basis . A third kind of levy is on Part D if you do not sign up for D when you are first eligible .
A Medicare levy surcharge is a tax on Australians that earn over a certain amount and dont have private health insurance hospital cover . This surcharge provides health coverage for you and your dependents , including your spouse , any of your children who are under 21 years of age , or any of your student children who are under 25 years of age . T he surcharge is in addition to the Medicare Levy of 1.5 % , which is paid by most Australian taxpayers , and is calculated at the rate of 1 % to 1.5 % of your income .
There is no income tax paid on life insurance benefits , in most cases . Life insurance does not go through probate if the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is a person . If the estate is large enough , estate taxes must be paid on life insurance . So in that respect , the IRS can take life insurance money , through applicable taxes . If you are asking if the IRS can take the proceeds of a life insurance policy if the insured person passes while owing back pay to the IRS , if the beneficiary is a person , the IRS can not take the life insurance money from the beneficiary . An exception would be if the beneficiary filed jointly with the insured , or if the beneficiary owed his/her own money to the IRS .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
Medicare Levy Exemption is an exemption granted to residents of Australia that prevents them from having to pay the Medicare levy if they are not eligible to receive Medicare . If an Australian is eligible to receive Medicare , they are bound to pay the Medicare Levy through their tax returns each year .
It will not be `` illegal '' not to have health insurance . However starting 2014 the federal government will start levying penalties on businesses that have over 50 full time equivilent employees and on individuals who do not have health insurance either through their spouse , work , individual coverage , or are listed as a covered dependent on someone else 's insurance policy .
There are 2 types of Medicare levy 's on the beneficiary that can apply . One is the LEP -LRB- late enrollment penalty -RRB- that applies if you fail to enroll in Medicare on a timely basis . The LEP is 10 % per year . The other is a penalty surcharge tax on high income earners earning over $ 85,000 or couples earning over $ 170,00
Almost all permanent cash value life insurance policies accumulate cash values based on the performance of their crediting methods . But they also have surrender charges , usually from the first 9 years to 15 years of a policy . The cash surrender value accessible cash values after the charges have been levied against the account value . It can be punitive to surrender cash values and may have ordinary income tax ramifications .
Employers with 50 or more full time employees are required to provide a government approved plan for their workers . Smaller employers -LRB- fewer than 50 full time -RRB- are not required to offer health insurance and many may not . Failure to comply with the employer mandate will result in fines -LRB- taxes -RRB- levied on the employer .
You are exempt from Medicare levy in Australia when you are not eligible for Medicare at all , if you meet one of the medical conditions outlined by the Australian Taxation Office , or if you were a foreign resident or a resident of Norfolk Island for a full year -LRB- 365 days -RRB- .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Why Did Employer Sponsored Health Insurance Began ?
That 's a great question ! There are two good reasons for an employer to offer coverage . The first reason for an employer to offer benefits was/is to draw an employee that may choose another employer . For example , if there are two widget factories in town , both paying the same wages , I can sweeten the deal for you by saying `` I 'll pay you the same as them , AND I 'll give you benefits ! '' Who would you choose ? Benefits are a way for the employer to entice and retain employees . The other reason is that if you have insurance , you can afford to go to the doctor and be treated . without the coverage , you miss work , or are forced to quit , impacting the companies profits by increasing turnover , training costs , and lost productivity.The employer also pays a portion of what the total cost of the coverage would have been , if you 'd have had to pay for it yourself . Hope that answers your question !
How Employer Health Insurance started ? 1920-1930 : The Rising Price of Medical Care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . The AHA designed the Blue Cross guidelines so as to reduce price competition among hospitals . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield The market for health insurance exploded in size in the 1940s , growing from a total enrollment of 20 million in 1940 to nearly 142 million in 1950 . During WWII there was a wage freeze however the Federal government permitted employees to provide benefits instead of wages . Companies began offering health insurance to employees and the employer sponsored health insurance market exploded .
In the 1920 's changes occurred that tended to increase the role that medicine played in people 's lives and to shift the focus of treatment from homes to hospitals . These changes caused the price of medical care to rise because of : Advances in medical technology Growing acceptance of medicine as a science Development of hospitals as treatment centers Encouragement for sick people to visit physicians and hospitals . Licensing and standards of care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield . That is where health insurance began
About 44 million people did not have health insurance prior to the Affordable Care Act . Since the new program began , over 7 million people have signed up for health insurance through the exchanges . Health plans are now `` guaranteed-issue '' as insurance companies can no longer decline you for a pre-existing condition or other health-related illness . Some people will still not have health insurance because many may choose to pay the penalty instead of securing coverage since the premiums for new plans are higher than the older plans , given the increase in benefits provided in each plan -LRB- the 10 essential health benefits required under each plan plus anything above and beyond it , varying by carrier -RRB- . If you have any questions about health insurance or would like help with your own coverage , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button - my direct contact information is available on my profile page .
Health insurance became linked to employment during World War 2 . There was a freeze on wages , and employers began offering health insurance as a means of differentiating themselves to attract and retain employees . The health insurance premiums were considered taxable expenses , so offering benefits provided a structural advantage to employers . As premiums costs rose over time employers passed more of the premium costs over to employees . Any contribution towards premiums made by employees are able to be paid using pretax elections , which continued the tax-based structural advantage to employment based benefits .
For a person in the individual health insurance market after January 1 , 2014 you can switch your health insurance in a limited number of circumstances under the requirements of the Affordabel Care Act . 1 -RRB- During the open enrollment period , which ended on March 31st , 2014 . The next open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 for an effective date of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . 2 -RRB- Having a change of life status event . There are several things that can occur in your work or personal life that would allow you to enroll or change carriers outside of the newly established open enrollment periods . Some examples are ; - Loss of employer based coverage due to termination of employment or reduction in hours . - COBRA expiration : your COBRA or state continuation of coverage period expires - Loss of a Government Sponsored Plan - loss of eligibility for Medicaid , CHIP , Medicare , TRICARE , Veterans programs , Peace Corps programs - Loss of Minimum Essential Coverage - loss of an existing policy with Minimum Essential Benefits such as ; a Student Health Insurance plan or State High Risk Pool coverage - Birth , Adoption , Foster Care or Legal Guardianship - Marriage - No longer being an eligible dependent ; loss of employer sponsored or individual coverage because you are no longer eligible as a dependent . Generally this would mean you have turned age 26 . - Divorce from a policyholder - Termination of a pre-ACA individual plan during 2014 -LRB- this does not apply to short term major medical insurance plans -RRB- - Moving : you move out of state , or to a new area that offers different plan options or is outside of an HMO plan 's service area - Returning from active military service - Being released from jail - Newly eligible or ineligible for exchange subsidies or premium tax credit or cost-sharing reductions . This would mean a change in income levels have either now qualified you for subsidies you did not previously qualify for or have disqualified you for subsidies that you previously qualified for . - A material violation by the health plan : the health plan you enrolled in violates a material provision of its contract This pretty well covers the situations in which an individual can switch their health insurance under the conditions of the Affordable Care Act .
You know , it sounds a little out of place , but there are reasons for why people lose their life insurance . Do any of these apply to you ? 1 . They didnt pay their premiums . 2 . They were covered under an employer-sponsored plan , and the employer stopped sponsoring that plan . 3 . They were covered under an association plan , and either the association stopped sponsoring the plan , or the carrier dropped the association .
Long Term Care Insurance began in the early 1970 's , but did not start becoming popular until the 1980 's , after a period of rising prices in nursing home care . Back in the 70 's the focus was to provide payment for nursing home care . Now Long Term Care insurance can be purchased to cover all types of service and living arrangements .
A good question ! Portability in insurance is similar to portability regarding anything else . For example a portable radio is one that you can take with you to the beach or a friends house . The question of portability regarding insurance usually comes up when discussing employer sponsored insurance . In many if not most cases insurance that is purchased through an employer sponsored group plan is NOT portable . That is if you leave the company your insurance terminates . Some products such as Aflac supplemental health insurance ARE portable even when purchased through your employer on a payroll deduction . There are some employer sponsored life insurance plans that are portable , so you should ask your employer or the HR department what yours is .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Renter 's insurance is important for two reasons . First , it covers your personal property -LRB- furniture , tv , audio system , clothes , dishes , etc -RRB- against loss . Second , it provides liability coverage . Let 's suppose you were cooking and a fire began because your attention was directed away . The fire that caused the damage was your fault , because you were negligent . The damage to the home or apartment you were renting may be more than what everything you own . In a recent case where the tenant did not have renter 's insurance , the cost of the damageswas recovered by garnishing the tenant 's wages by 30 % until the entire cost of the damages was recovered .
Corporate owned life insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- has been used for many years , but it 's purpose has fluctuated over the years . It began , and mainly is now , as a way to provide necessary funding to a business when a key employee died . The death benefit allows the employer to recoup some of the loss of earnings incurred when a productive employee dies , and provides funds for recruiting and training a replacement . For some years , it was a popular practice for an employer to take out life insurance on all employees . Because it covered even the most low paying jobs , this type of insurance was dubbed the nickname , `` dead peasant 's life insurance '' . However , tax advantages have been tightened up on COLI , and now employees must give their consent for their employer to take out this type of policy on them . So taking out life insurance on all employees is not as popular as it used to be . The answer to your question is , yes , your employer can take out life insurance on you , IF you give your consent .
Health insurance in the US began during the Civil War era with policies issued by the Massachusetts Health Insurance Company . The Blue Cross association was the first group to start what would evolve in to modern health insurance plans in this country . Other carriers , including Time Insurance -LRB- now known as Asssurant -RRB- have a long history of offering health insurance to individuals and employer groups . Over the last few years carriers such as Mutual of Omaha , Bankers Life and Casualty , Aetna , Cigna -LRB- formerly Connecticut General -RRB- and others have become prominent in the health insurance market . Kaiser Permanente introduce the HMO concept in 1933
Time ! Okay , I 'll go deeper . :-RRB- Money , properly invested , grows and compounds over time . The sooner you begin the more you would have.If you start your working career at age 25 and worked until age 70 that is 45 years of working.Hypothetically , let 's say you began putting away just $ 200 a month at age 25 and stopped at age 45 and earned a 7 % actual return , if you did n't put in another penny and waited until age 70 you 'd have $ 565.5458.87 . That means you put in $ 48,000 of your money and allowed it to compound.If you waited until age 45 to start saving for retirement you would have to put in $ 698.04 per month for 25 years earning that 7 % actual return to end up with the same $ 565,458.87 . It would take $ 209,410.68 of your money to accumulate that much money.The sooner you start , even if it is n't that much money , put into the right places can really blossom into a tremendous amount of money.Hope this helps .
In one word ... Time ! Okay , I 'll go deeper . :-RRB- Money , properly invested , grows and compounds over time . The sooner you begin the more you would have . If you start your working career at age 25 and worked until age 70 that is 45 years of working . Hypothetically , let 's say you began putting away just $ 200 a month at age 25 and stopped at age 45 and earned a 7 % actual return , if you did n't put in another penny and waited until age 70 you 'd have $ 565.5458.87 . That means you put in $ 48,000 of your money and allowed it to compound . If you waited until age 45 to start saving for retirement you would have to put in $ 698.04 per month for 25 years earning that 7 % actual return to end up with the same $ 565,458.87 . It would take $ 209,410.68 of your money to accumulate that much money . The sooner you start , even if it is n't that much money , put into the right places can really blossom into a tremendous amount of money . Hope this helps .
Employer sponsored health insurance is a group health insurance policy put in place by an employer for the benefit of their employees . Under this arrangement the employer is the actual insurance policy holder -LRB- employees receive a certificate of coverage under the group plan -RRB- and is required to make a financial contribution towards the cost of the coverage and to maintain a certain minimum level of enrollment among their workforce in order tokeep the group policy in force . Employer sponsored health insurance is the most common way that Americans receive their health insurance coverage .
How much does health insurance cost employers ? In the 25 years I have been in the insurance business the cost of health insurance has risen just about every year . When I began the cost of providing health insurance and other benefits to employees ran about 5 % or less of payroll . In other words the cost of giving everybody health insurance was about equal to to 5 % of the sum total of everyone 's take home pay . Now nationally I believe that cost is around 15 % of payroll today .
That 's a very subjective question ... . like asking `` what 's the best car '' ? It depends on your specific needs and budget . That 's why it 's best to work with a licensed agent , who can help you navigate to the best plan FOR YOU . Since the Affordable Care Act began , the plans have become standardized , so you only have to deal with dozens of plans instead of hundreds . But there are still variables like doctor networks and cost to consider . So bottom line , there is no single answer . But a licensed insurance professional will definitely make things a lot simpler for you and help you get the right plan
That 's a very subjective question ... . like asking `` what car should I get '' ? It depends on your specific needs and budget . That 's why it 's best to work with a licensed agent , who can help you navigate to the best plan FOR YOU . Since the Affordable Care Act began , the plans have become standardized , so you only have to deal with dozens of plans instead of hundreds . But there are still variables like doctor networks and cost to consider . So bottom line , there is no single answer . But a licensed insurance professional will definitely make things a lot simpler for you and help you get the right plan
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Own A Car Without Insurance ?
You can , sure , but in most states , insurance of some sort is required in order to register it and drive it on public roads . Normally , states require a certain minimum level of liability coverage and proof there of in order to process a registration . Your insurance professional will be able to help you understand your state 's regulations .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
If you do n't own a car that is registered in your state , indefinitely . However , in most if not all states , if you own a car and register it for use on public roads and highways , having insurance is a legal requirement . Without it , States can impose fines and cancel registrations . If you have a lien or a lease , the finance company can repossess your car . Short answer , not long . Best answer if you have a car and privileges you want to keep , do n't go without for any length of time .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
No rental car agency is going to rent you a car without some type of insurance . If you do not have your own insurance or do not wish to use your own insurance you may purchase the insurance offered by the rental car carrier . Keep in mind , liability limits offered by the rental car agencies are state minimum . All rental car agencies are actually concerned about is that their car is going to be repaired in the event of a loss .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
You must have insurance when you rent a car . You have the option to either purchase the insurance offered by the rental car agency or if you personal policy extends you have the option to use your own personal auto insurance coverage . Always check with your agent to see if your own insurance will cover you in a rental car . The rental car agency is not going to let you rent their vehicle without insurance .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
Coverage follows the car . Example 1 : If you were given a car -LRB- loaned -RRB- and the car has no insurance , you can buy insurance on the car and your insurance will be primary . Another option , someone helped you to buy a car . For example your credit score is n't good enough to finance , so a friend of yours signed under your loan as a primary payor . You can get insurance under your name and even list your friend on the policy as a loss payee . In this case , we always suggest you get a loan gap coverage : the difference between the car 's actual cash value and the amount still owned on it . Example 2 : The car you are loaned has insurance . You can buy a policy under your name , list the car on that policy and in case of the accident , your policy will become a secondary or excess . Once the limits of the primary car insurance are exhausted , your coverage would kick in and hopefully pay for the rest . I specifically used the word hopefully , because each accident is unique and it 's hard to interpret the coverage without the actual claim scenario . And even with a given claim scenario , sometimes there are 2 possible outcomes of a claim .
Driving without car insurance can have both legal and financial impacts upon your life . Caveat , this is geared towards Michigan drivers . Financially : if you get into a collision and are negligent , you could be sued for physical damages to the other driver/passengers . Without insurance you will be on the hook for the entire judgment against you . Furthermore , if you are driving a new car you will either be out the money you spent on the car , or you will owe the leasing company or lender the value of the car . Legal : in Michigan driving without proof of no-fault insurance can result in a $ 500 ticket and three points on your license . So you will be out $ 500 immediately , and a huge increase in your insurance upon renewal . This is assuming you will still have the same insurance and not get a non-renewal notice . I hope this helps .
You can cancel at anytime . it is not the best idea to go with out insurance . If you are canceling because the car is not running or you no longer own the car and are looking for a replacement that is different . If your car is no longer working you can place just comprehensive coverage on it and no liability while it is disabled that way it has some protection on your car . But on the flip side . If you no longer own a car you can keep the insurance till you get a replacement car and be covered if you are borrowing someone 's car and they did n't pay their insurance . Also there is the option of non owned policy . Also when you start your insurance up again if you have gone more then 30 days with no coverage your rates increase for lack of proof of prior . Talk to your agent and see what works best for you . If you are canceling because of your budget talk to your agent and see what they can do to keep you covered and at a better rate .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Rental car insurance is available from rental car agencies . If you own an insured car the insurance from that car extends to a rental car which means that purchasing the coverage from the rental agency is not necessary . If you do not own a car , it is possible to purchase non-owned auto insurance which would eliminate the requirement for buying liability insurance from the rental agency . You would still need physical damage coverage .
If you 're auto insurance is just too expensive for you to afford , there are some things you can do to help ease that burden . You may not like some of my advice , but it 's the right advice . A very large part of your insurance premium is the physical damage to the car itself . Raising deductibles will lower your premiums somewhat . Ask yourself if you really need to cover the physical damage at all . If it 's an older car and you own it outright , this could be an option . Before you do this , however , understand that , if your car is damaged , the insurance company will not pay to fix it . One thing not to do is to lower your bodily injury liability limits . You wo n't save very much and you 'll be putting everything you own at risk , including your income . Here 's the advice you may not like : Perhaps you have too nice a car for your budget . If that 's the case , get a less expensive car . Then , when your finances -LRB- or your driving record -RRB- allow , you can always get a nicer car . Talk to an agent you can trust . They can give you advice on these questions as well as others . It also helps if you check rates on a car before you buy it . Everyone loves getting a new car . You just do n't want an unpleasant surprise when your insurance bill comes .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
Most companies will allow you to cancel insurance at any time without penalty . Some charge what is known as a short rate cancellation that might reduce the amount of any unused premium . I assume that you are cancelling the policy because you no longer own the car . If you still own the car I recommend that you purchase comprehensive insurance if the car is less than 10 years old and will not be driven . That will pay for damages that occur to a non-operational vehicle like a tree falling on the car , or windstorm damage .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Exactly Does Medicare Supplement F Cover ?
Medicare Supplemental Plan F covers 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . Keep in mind , when you have Supplemental -LRB- AKA Medigap -RRB- Plans , Medicare is your primary insurance provider . For medically necessary procedures , Medicare Parts A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- and B -LRB- Doctors -RRB- provides good coverage , but still leaves folks on Medicare with a lot of out of pocket exposure . The Plan F pays for everything that Medicare does n't pay . However , if Medicare determines that the medical procedure you received was n't medically necessary , they wo n't pay anything nor will the Supplement Plan -LRB- regardless of who you get your supplemental plan with -RRB- .
Medicare Supplement F -LRB- Medigap -RRB- covers -LRB- among other things -RRB- Part A Coinsurance and Hospital costs up to 365 days after Medicare benefits run out . Part B coinsurance and copay are covered along with the first three pints of blood used . The Part A Hospice Care Copay or Coinsurance is covered along with Skilled Nursing Facility Coinsurance . There are many additional benefits that can be reviewed with an experienced broker .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
It depends on which AARP Medicare Supplement plan you have . Also , all the Medicare Supplement plans cover the exact same benefits . So for instance a AARP Medicare Supplement Plan F is exactly the same as any other carrier . The only difference is the monthly premium . Plan F does cover the Medicare Part A & Part B deductible . There are many other plans out there that may fit your needs . Contact an independent agent that specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance and they will be able to show you all the plans available to you . They will save you a lot of time and money .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plan F is the most popular and most comprehensive of the 10 supplement plans , but also features the highest premiums . If budget is not a major concern , I would recommend going with this plan as it offers the most predictable healthcare expense structure - just about everything in hospital and doctor office visits , tests , and exams are covered at 100 % . Plan N can be a great option as well , especially if your doctors accept assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- thus not subjecting you to any excess charges -LRB- which plans F and G cover -RRB- . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans in total and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . In short , each plan has it 's own pros and cons and what may be suitable for you may not be for someone else . Independent agent can provide you with the rates for multiple companies and help get you set up with the plan that 's right for you . Carriers try to differentiate themselves by competing on rates and what , if any , value-added services they offer . Value-added services can be things like a help line , discounts for services -LRB- such as dental and vision - not dental and vision insurance , just discounts off the full price -RRB- , and others . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
Typically , when you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and you have a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan , you will not need to have an additional health plan . Original Medicare -LRB- parts A & B -RRB- cover approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses - Medigap plans will pay all or a portion of the other 20 % . If you have group coverage as well , you would be spending extra money on those premiums unnecessarily . You can not be forced to go on her group health insurance if the two of you got married - it 's only an available option for you . If you have a Medicare supplement plan other than a plan F or plan G , I would recommend switching to one of those two plans before adding yourself to your fiance 's group coverage - it would save you countless dollars by comparison . Plan F provides full coverage - every other plan provides good coverage , but you will share some of the expenses . I would recommend consulting with an experienced independent Medigap broker who can review your specific situation and help you determine the best course of action . I would also suggest reviewing the Medigap plan you currently have to see if there are better rates available -LRB- the plans are standardized meaning you regardless of which carrier it 's through , the benefits are exactly the same - plan F from company A is the same as plan F from company B -RRB- . Changing a Medigap plan can be completed at anytime during the year - you do not have to wait for the annual enrollment period like you would with prescription drug plans or Medicare advantage plans . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage -LRB- my background is in senior insurance -RRB- and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Can I Sign Up For Medigap Insurance ?
There is an `` open enrollment period '' during which you can buy any Medigap insurance policy -LRB- Plan F -RRB- sold in your state beginning the month in which you turn age 65 and you are enrolled in Medicare Part B . During this six month open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap insurance offered , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people in good health . If you apply for Medigap coverage after your open enrollment period , there 's no guarantee that an insurance company will sell you a Medigap policy if you dont meet the medical underwriting requirements , unless you 're eligible because you have group health insurance through an employer or union . If this is your situation , the Medigap enrollment period begins when you sign-up for Part B . There are some situations if you are under 65 and are eligible for Medicare because of a disability you could be eligible for Medigap coverage . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and are under 65 , some states require at least one type of Medigap policy to be offered to you .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you signed up for Medicare Part A & Part B during your initial enrollment period , then your effective date will be either the first of the month you turn 65 -LRB- this is the case for most individuals -RRB- or 2 or 3 months after -LRB- if you signed up after the month you turned 65 -RRB- . If you decided to wait because you were still working -LRB- e.g. on a group health plan through your employer -RRB- , then you may be eligible for a special enrollment period and set up an effective date for the first of the following month -LRB- you 'll likely need to complete the Part B enrollment at your local social security office -RRB- . If you decided to wait on signing up for Part B and do not have a special enrollment period , then you would be looking at signing up during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . If you 're signing up during this window , then your effective date would be July 1 .
You can sign up for Medicare online at medicare.gov . If you are nearing age 65 , you can sign up in the three months before or after the month of your 65th birthday . If you would rather sign up by phone , you can call 1-800-MEDICARE -LRB- 1-800-633-4227 -RRB- . Or you can go to your local Social Security Office to sign up for Medicare .
Other than your initial enrollment period , Medigap does not have an open enrollment period . For most people , when they turn age 65 and sign up for Medicare Part B , their initial enrollment period starts . During that 6 month period you can sign up for any Medicare supplement plan without providing evidence of insurability . But you are allowed to buy or change your Medigap plan at any time of the year .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B at the same time that you sign up for Medicare Part A , or you can wait to sign up for Part B until you have stopped working and no longer have group coverage . If you are receiving Social Security benefits , you will be signed up for Part A and B automatically just before your 65th birthday .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
The best way to buy a Medigap plan is to do it through an independent broker who can compare multiple options to find you the desired plan at the lowest possible cost -LRB- brokers do not charge any fees for their services -RRB- - I can help you with this as my background is in senior life and health insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- . If you 're new to Medicare , you have a 6-month initial enrollment period where you can sign up for any Medigap plan from any carrier without any medical underwriting , meaning they are guaranteed issue . Give me a call and I will help you get your Medigap plan set up . Thanks very much .
If you are age 65 and have begun receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare Part A and B . You can sign up for an Advantage Plan or get Medicare Part D -LRB- or other letters -RRB- at that time , as well . You sign up for Medicare by visiting your local Social Security office , going to Medicare.gov -LRB- where you will be directed to a website where you can sign up -RRB- , or calling 1-800-MEDICARE .
There is an `` open enrollment period '' during which you can buy any Medigap insurance policy -LRB- Plan F -RRB- sold in your state beginning the month in which you turn age 65 and you are enrolled in Medicare Part B . During this six month open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap insurance offered , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people in good health . If you apply for Medigap coverage after your open enrollment period , there 's no guarantee that an insurance company will sell you a Medigap policy if you dont meet the medical underwriting requirements , unless you 're eligible because you have group health insurance through an employer or union . If this is your situation , the Medigap enrollment period begins when you sign-up for Part B . There are some situations if you are under 65 and are eligible for Medicare because of a disability you could be eligible for Medigap coverage . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and are under 65 , some states require at least one type of Medigap policy to be offered to you .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B online at medicare.gov . The website offers information about when and how to apply , along with a form that you can fill in and submit online . If you would rather call to sign up , you can call Social Security at1-800-772-1213 . Or you can sign up at your local Social Security office .
One of the best ways to compare Medigap Plans is to look at the benefits side-by-side . Medigap Plans are standardized , so all the lettered plans have the exact same benefits with every insurance company . Choosing to work with an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance is a step in the right direction . The right agent will take the time to show you the different Medigap Plans and describe the pros and cons based on your individual needs . Here are some questions that you may want to ask yourself : Do you want to pay the annual Part B deductible ? -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Do you want to pay any co-pays or co-insurance ? Do you want all the Medicare approved charges covered so you do n't have to deal with deductibles , co-pays and co-insurance ? As I stated above , Medigap Plans are standardized -LRB- Plan G with ABC insurance company has the same exact benefits with XYZ insurance company -RRB- and the only difference is the price . Once you decide which benefits you want , your agent can shop the market for the best premium . But do n't let that be the end of the story . You will want to make sure the insurance agent helping you with this process is one that provides on-going service and annual rate reviews . Far too many times do I speak with Seniors who signed up for a Medigap plan with a great premium only to have it sky rocket years later ... never once did the original agent check in with them . Thank you for taking the time to read my response . If I can help you compare Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 or visit my website at www.remedigap.com .
The short answer is it depends . When you turn 65 and start your Medicare Part B you will get a 6 month window where you can choose any Medigap Insurance Plan you like . There will be no health questions and you can not be denied . After you turn 65 and are past the 6 month window of signing up for Medicare Part B then you can still get a Medigap Plan . With most carriers there will be 10-12 health questions that you will need to answer in order to get approved . Working with an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance will help you to choose the insurance carrier that fits your health situation the best . Most of the health questions are centered around big and recent health issues . I would not be concerned with getting denied I would just contact an expert to help you through the process . Once you have a Medigap Insurance it is guaranteed renewable which means it can never be canceled on you as long as you pay the premiums . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
You can also go to the website for the Social Security Administration at www.SSA.gov for information and to sign up . One important thing to remember when signing up for Medicare in Texas is that you have a one time open enrollment period when you first sign up for Medicare Part B . This means there are no health underwriting questions and you can select any Medicare Supplement plan available . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of your medical costs . The Medicare Supplement is designed to cover the remaining 20 % or some variation depending on what plan you go with . We have helped many clients through the Medicare Supplement process in Texas . You can compare Texas Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
You can sign up to receive Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . I believe you can click on `` Medicare '' under the benefits tab . There should be some easy instructions there that will walk you through the sign up process . Signing up online is preferable for those applying during their initial enrollment period -LRB- 3 months before age 65 , the month you turn 65 , and the 3 months after you turn age 65 -RRB- . If you 're applying under special enrollment , I recommend going down to your local social security office to get your paperwork processed . Please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can sign up to receive Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . I believe you can click on `` Medicare '' under the benefits tab . There should be some easy instructions there that will walk you through the sign up process . Signing up online is preferable for those applying during their initial enrollment period -LRB- 3 months before age 65 , the month you turn 65 , and the 3 months after you turn age 65 -RRB- . If you 're applying under special enrollment , I recommend going down to your local social security office to get your paperwork processed .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B late , but there may be penalties . If you do not enroll in Medicare Part B when you first become eligible , you can enroll during the open enrollment period from January 1 and March 31 each year . If you sign up during this period , your plan will become effective July 1 . You will be charged an additional 10 % on your premium for every 12 months you went without coverage . However , if you did n't enroll because you were covered by a different insurance plan , you can sign up during the eight months following the end of that plan without a penalty .
You can sign up for Medicare Part D when you turn 65 . If you are already 65 but have not previously gotten Part D because you had credible drug coverage from your employer , and you are now losing that coverage , you can sign up within 60 days of losing that coverage . There are other exceptions in which you can sign up throughout the year , but if you do n't have a `` Special Enrollment '' situation , then you would have to apply during open enrollment , which is Oct 15 - Dec 7th .
Buying Medigap Insurance can be a lot easier than it looks . You can get immediate information and quotes by going to a website like ours . You type in basic information and can be reviewing quotes from the top rated carriers in about one minute . You can follow up with one of our licensed staff to get all of your questions answered . I would suggest the following to make things easier on you : Contact an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance -LRB- Medicare Supplement Insurance -RRB- . Look at what plans are available . Learn what each of those plans will cover and not cover . Have that agent help you pick the the Medigap plan that best fits your needs and budget . Have the agent sign you up with the plan and the top `` A '' rated carrier that fits best for you . Good luck !
The main way to qualify for Medicare is to be turning 65 year sold . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Are Trampolines Covered By Renters Insurance ?
Many carriers will not provide renters/homeowners insurance coverage if the insured has a trampoline on the property that is covered . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Trampolines are an attractive nuisance not unlike the pond on the back forty , They are the source of a lot of additional liability exposure to the policy and the homeowner . The biggest reason that liability increases is because more than one child or person is one the equipment at a time . Most families with a trampoline have n't established risk-based rules for use and enjoyment and so what looks to be a fun and exciting play thing , becomes a hazard teeming with potential to cause great bodily harm . Insurance companies know from experience that trampolines cause losses and are expensive to insure because the injuries can become catastrophic . Broken bones are one thing . A broken neck with paralysis is completely another but well within the outcomes on a trampoline . Add to the trampoline an almost complete lack of training or instruction on the correct methods of use -LRB- and the lack of appropriate rules for use -RRB- , and we find the trampoline becomes similar to a loaded gun just waiting for curious hands with just as much potential to destroy a healthful life . Another issue that crops us is the degradation of the platform fabric since it is exposed to weather and sunlight . People have been known to bust through the platform because it became degraded due to the sun and weather effects . Bones get broke hitting the found and frame members below the deck . In my experience , most companies do n't want anything to do with insuring a home with a trampoline . A relative few do n't charge additional premium and do n't restrict the presence of a trampoline . Others still will permit a trampoline when it is is present for coverage at an additional charge . One carrier we represent charges an additional $ 75 annually for the trampoline , requires the fences to be installed -LRB- most trampolines come with them -RRB- , and they wo n't provide insurance on the home unless the trampoline is also included in coverage . All in all , you do n't simply have the choice to not insure the trampoline since the mere act of having one dramatically increases the chances of having a loss ! That said , trampolines can be enjoyed safely but it requires careful and near constant monitoring by the responsible adults , the establishment of rules for use , the ability to protect the equipment from non-invited use by neighbors when the owner or their children are not using the equipment , and inspection periodically for signs of degradation and normal wear and tear . Additionally , basic skills should be discussed , taught and understood , limits should be placed on the behavior that is allowed on the trampoline , and responsible adults should be willing to stop all play when careful control can not be maintained . Many injuries occur when the parents are not paying attention or aware from the home . Let 's face it , no one wants to be sued for the liability that may arise out of an injury on a trampoline and no one wants to deal with the often catastrophic injuries that can occur to your children or the neighbors . These latter comments and insight are a good foundation for understanding why an insurance company does n't like trampolines and why homeowner insurance is often negatively influenced when they are present on the property .
Many companies refuse to write a homeowners policy on a home with a trampoline . Despite the safety devices that are often used , the trampoline has a record of claims that make it unacceptable to many companies . If you are already covered and purchase a trampoline there will probably not be any change until the company discovers the trampoline . You will probably be notified of either a cancellation or notified that the company will not renew coverage . In either event contact your agent .
Trampolines are a major problem for insurance companies . Most insurance companies will not insure a home when they know that there is a trampoline present . Some insurance companies will accept a home with a trampoline . There are brokers who specialize in companies that handle special risk cases . You should consult the yellow pages and locate someone who can quote a policy with the trampoline .
Many companies refuse to issue a homeowners policy when there is a trampoline on the property . The trampoline is clearly identified as a hazard . Regardless of mechanisms to make them safe , there is still a high incidence of claims involving a trampoline . Companies that will insure a home with a trampoline will normally be considerably more expensive .
Having a trampoline is a liability issue . Most property polices will exclude the use of a trampoline so if you are wanting to own a trampoline I highly suggest you search out an independent agent who can locate you an insurance carrier that would consider the use of a trampoline .
Typically speaking yes . Home owners insurance carriers are going to want to see that the trampoline is secure , meaning in a fenced yard with a locked gate , . That is saying also that IF the carrier will even accept the risk of the trampoline . You should contact your independent insurance agent before purchasing a trampoline and ask them what their carrier would say about a trampoline .
There are more than likely some companies out there that will write a homeowners policy with a trampoline on the property , but most will not . The liability issues with the trampolines have become very costly to many insurance companies . If you find a company that will accept the trampoline and not exclude it be prepared to pay a premium equal to the risk assumed by the carrier . Contact a local agent to find out if they have any carriers that they work with that accept trampolines as part of the homeowners policy .
Trampolines may be fun but they are problematic for insurance companies . Some may reject coverage if one has a trampoline , while others may accept the risk so long as it is fitted with a perimeter fence or screen that can be locked when not in use . Trampolines , polls , and yard swing sets don/t in and of themselves cause premium increases , but they are `` attractive risks '' that increase the probabilities of a liability claim . Thus insurance companies consider properties that have them very carefully .
Good question . Many insurance companies will ask if you have a trampoline on the premises . If you do , it will likely make you ineligible for 50 % of the homeowners insurance companies in NY . If you have homeowners insurance already and you did n't have a trampoline -LRB- at the time of application -RRB- you can purchase a trampoline and coverage would be afforded under most policies . They key is to avoid making a material misrepresentation on the application . Of course , always check with your local independent agent .
Great question ! The best thing to do would be to check with your agent first , and ask . There are many injuries every year from trampoline accidents , so there is an increased risk . Typically increased risk = increased cost . I can assure you that should someone be injured on your property , on your trampoline , and they file a claim against you for the hospital expense , your trampoline will end up costing you plenty . If you have more questions , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
There are several ways that you can purchase a renters policy . If you search the internet you will find some websites that will actually quote and issue a renters policy . The problem you face with this approach is that a policy is selected to pay your damages when you suffer a loss may be inadequate . It is quite likely that when you actually suffer that loss you will find that you are not sufficiently insured . Then the insurance policy you have been paying on becomes the most expensive policy that you could have purchased because it wont cover your loss . The better approach is to engage an insurance agent . You may not know an agent . Get recommendations from your neighbors , friends and colleagues . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . You really want everyone to be on the same page at the time of a loss . The agent will probably start by asking you the value of your personal property . To prepare for that question , I suggest that you take pictures of everything that you own . You can store that valuable record off site in case of a loss . Review the pictures and make an estimate of the cost to replace everything that you own . The sum of those estimates determines the value you need to set on your renters policy . Remember that you are looking at replacement value , not current value . In this process you might have property that is subject to internal limits within the policy . You need to specify the replacement value of any jewelry , guns , computer equipment , and collectibles . There are other classes of property that warrant special attention . Ask the agent about any unusual property that might be in your possession . The next thing that the agent will discuss is the liability limit . Insist on the highest limit that the agent can write . You can never have enough liability insurance . This protects you by providing for your defense and any awards against you up to the limits of the policy . You want these limits to be very high . A lawsuit can ruin your life . If you have a pet make sure that the agent knows about the pet . This is particularly important if you own a dog . Policies often have greatly reduced liability limits for dogs and may exclude all coverage for dogs of certain breeds or with a history of biting . This is a major source of claims . If you have a trampoline on the property makes sure that the agent knows that as well . Often owning a renters policy is a requirement of a lease . In those cases the landlord generally wants to be named as an additional insured . You need to have his or her name and address to provide to the agent . Incidentally , this is a reasonable requirement of the landlord and might be required by his or her insurance company . The final piece of information has to do with any losses that you might have previously suffered either at the unit you are currently renting or another unit . The information should be as detailed as possible to assist in underwriting your application .
For most insurance companies , presence of a trampoline is a cause for the company to decline the home . If a trampoline is detected on the property after the policy is issued , the policy will likely not be renewed .
It may , yes . Many insurance companies wili require that the trampoline be outfitted with an installed safety net system that completely encloses the circumference of the trampoline . The opening of that system will also need to be able to be completely secured by a locking mechanism . In many cases , without this compliance , many companies will not offer coverage at all .
Most companies do not provide coverage for trampolines under homeowners or renters insurance and if they provide coverage for them there are typically strict guidelines that must be followed to keep coverage in effect . Every policy is different . I recommend that you read your policy completely to determine the coverages provide or contact your local agent and have them explain the coverages that your policy provides .
Many carriers will not provide renters/homeowners insurance coverage if the insured has a trampoline on the property that is covered . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
That is a good question . As long as you have all the necessary information about the property and there has been no major losses a homeowners insurance policy can be bound within a day . Keep in mind that credit , condition of the property & square feet of living area all go into the rating factors for HO insurance . Additionally , if a trampoline , diving board or viscous pet is on the property it can complicate purchasing insurance . It is best to give at least 2-3 days for the agent to look around and get the best rates available in the market .
Your neighbor and yourself with similiar house values could get insurance from the same company and your rates will be different . Insurance premiums are determined by many factors , including your insurance score , loss history , the existance of dogs , trampolines , pools , oil tanks , etc. . They best way to get the best coverage for yourself at the best rate is to have an a local reputable independent agent with access to multiple carriers take one application for you and then they will shop all of their markets .
There is no single answer to that question . Which Homeowners policy is best for you will depend on your individual situation . Where do you live ? How old is your home ? Do you have a dog , a pool , a trampoline ? The best thing to do is speak with an independent agent and shop around . An independent agent can help you shop multiple companies and advise you on which plan is right for you .
Good question . Typical homeowners exclusions are flood , wear & tear , intentional acts and mechanical breakdown . Many policies will have exclusions for trampolines , water damage , wind exclusions , etc. . It 's very important that you check your individual policy for your specific exclusions . Usually towards the end of the policy you will see the exclusionary endorsement list . If you have any questions I would contact your independent insurance agent that holds the policy .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Farmers Insurance Have Renters Insurance ?
Farmers Insurance does have renters insurance . I would recommend you contact your local Farmers Insurance agent to discuss the renters insurance options available . You can find your local agent by going to WEBSITELINK . Your local agent will be able to find you the best options for your policy .
Renters coverage differs with different insurance companies . Renters insurance from Farmers Insurance provides liability coverage in case you harm another individual or damage their property . Farmers also includes a small coverage of $ 500 should someone be hurt inside your apartment . Renters insurance through farmers has liability limits that go up to $ 1,000,000 . This is a great product to supplement your auto insurance liability limits . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
Farmers Insurance does have renters insurance . I would recommend you contact your local Farmers Insurance agent to discuss the renters insurance options available . You can find your local agent by going to WEBSITELINK . Your local agent will be able to find you the best options for your policy .
Homeowners Insurance typically includes coverage for your actual home -LRB- the Dwelling Coverage -RRB- , coverage for separate structures -LRB- such as detached garage or shed -RRB- , coverage for your belongings -LRB- both the items inside your home , as well as items that may be outside of the home -RRB- , liability protection -LRB- coverage that protects you if you are sued -RRB- , and medical payment coverage -LRB- an amount thatcan paid to someone that is injured on your property -RRB- . These 5 items are usually included in any homeowners policy -LRB- renters and landlord policies have variations of these -RRB- . However , some insurance companies also include some extras at no additional cost . For instance , Farmers Insurance includes an extended coverage of 125 % of the dwelling coverage . This means that if the cost to rebuild the home exceeds the amount of dwelling coverage , Farmers Insurance will cover an extra 25 % over and above the dwelling coverage . Farmers Insurance also includes ID theft protection , and a few other extras .
Renters Insurance costs vary depending on the location , type of dwelling and amount of property coverage . The cost of renters insurance will also vary depending on the insurance carrier you choose to go with . I know for my Farmers agency , renters insurance can be as little as $ 10 a month .
Per their website , Farmers insurance offers life insurance through Farmers New World Life Insurance Company . To obtain a competitive quote from numerous life insurance companies to compare to their quote , contact a website that offers life insurance quotes from multiple companies . It never hurts to look around , especially if you can utilize one website that does the shopping for you .
There is no one company that has the best renter 's insurance for all persons . In certain states , State Farm or Farmers may have the best rates . In other states , Nationwide or Liberty Mutual may offer the best options . And perhaps Geico in specific situations . Am I evading the question ? Yes . So ... here 's what you should do . Contact an experienced broker and within a few minutes , you 'll be presented with the most affordable renter 's insurance options in your area .
If you wish to avoid a sales pitch and would rather take your time and utilize a Self Service Insurance portal , you may proceed to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online . If however , you would prefer to visit a retail agent and deal with a person directly , you may wish to contact Farmers , State Farm or Allstate and find your local agent who will be happy to make an appointment and answer your questions directly . The following link will provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
If you want to know more about any particular insurance company , I recommend going to a resource that can give you independent information or ratings . For example , if you were buying a microwave , I would suggest Consumer Reports . You can research most insurance companies through AMBest.com , WeissRatings.com , or StandardandPoors.com . `` I am a Farmers agent but my posts are my own and are not statements by or for Farmers . ''
The first thing I recommend looking for is appropriate coverage . Your homeowners insurance should have enough dwelling coverage to cover not only the cost of rebuilding your home , but also cover the clearing and removal of debris is your home is destroyed . All too often , I see homeowners policies that ONLY cover the cost to rebuild . If you do n't have enough to clear the debris , you could get stuck with that cost yourself -LRB- and that cost is in the neighborhood of $ 30,000 ! -RRB- . If the cost to rebuild your home becomes MORE than your coverage , is there anything in place to help pay for that ? For example , Farmers Insurance will include an extra 25 % of the dwelling coverage . So , if your home coverage is $ 100,000 , and it ends up cost $ 125,000 to rebuild your home , Farmers Insurance would pay that amount -LRB- minus your home deductible -RRB- . The final thing I would point out would be the deductible . In many cases , if you have never had a claim , you can have a lower deductible . However , many insurance companies are moving to a higher deductible model -LRB- usually as a percentage of the dwelling coverage -RRB- . So , if your dwelling coverage is $ 200,000 , your deductible would be 1 % of the dwelling , or $ 2,000 . I recommend finding a company that offers a deductible you feel comfortable paying .
Farmers New World life insurance company -LRB- commonly seen as Farmers Insurance -RRB- is one of the thousands of insurance companies in the insurance marketplace . When you 're looking at purchasing life insurance , it 's important to look at multiple carriers because they all feature different rates , some will feature better rates for certain types of products than others , offer volume discounts -LRB- e.g. rate discount at certain increments of coverage such as $ 250,000 , $ 500,000 , $ 1,000,000 , etc. -RRB- , and respond differently to medical histories and conditions . In short , the carrier that will work best for you program may be different than the carrier that will work best for someone else because we each have our own needs and budgets . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent life insurance brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Consulting with an experienced broker is always a great first step when looking for coverage . We will help you determine what an appropriate benefit structure is for your needs and budget , and help you through the process of securing the coverage from start to finish and beyond . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Farmers renters insurance rates will vary , depending on where you live , the type of coverage you have and perhaps other discounts that you may qualify for . For example , the coverage on your contents could vary greatly , along with other riders that may be included . It 's possible that monthly rates could be as low as $ 8 and as high as $ 20 or $ 30 .
No , Farmer 's Insurance Group does not sell Disability Insurance . To get a quote for Disability Insurance , you can call an agency that sells multiple Life Insurance policies , either in your local area or on the internet . They can help you shop multiple companies to find your best Disability Insurance rate .
Home insurance can be obtained numerous property and casualty insurance companies . If you currently have auto insurance , you may start with that company as having both auto and homeowners policies with the same company can provide discounts that reduce your overall cost . You can also get quotes online from companies such as State Farm , Farmer 's , Liberty Mutual , and Allstate . While these companies will provide quotes for their own companies , getting a quote from an insurance broker or AAA insurance can provide quotes from several different companies and may provide your best opportunity to find the lowest cost . Be sure to speak to an experienced insurance agent to ensure you have proper coverage . Just because once company has the lowest price does n't make it your best option . Be sure understand deductibles and riders such as earthquake insurance .
21st Century Insurance Company -LRB- direct -RRB- is now a wholly owned subsidiary of Farmers Insurance ; a full service insurance company utilizing the Agency system . The system has proven to be expensive in the opinion of customers ; the agency system is set up for clients todeal with their carrier through the agents for all inquiries creating a sales opportunity every time a client needs assistance . 21st Century specializes in discount preferred Auto Insurance and they do a great job at it ! The company itself does not offer Homeowners Insurance ; their telephone representatives are trained to cross sell property insurance through their referral system . Since their Auto Insurance is very inexpensive and they have a great track record , most of their customer base have their property insurance placed independently .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Geico is primarily an auto insurance company . They would be lumped in with State Farm , Allstate , Farmers , etc. . All of those company WILL sell you life insurance . And they will pay the claim when you die just like all life insurance companies . BUT a wise consumer should always shop thier life insurance with companies that are focused only on life insurance . You will usually find much more attractive choices . Do n't select life insurance by brand name . That 's the biggest mistake you can make and it 's why companies advertise so much . Select by rates and policy features .
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
The largest auto insurance insurer is State Farm , who reported 8.7 billion in premium last year . Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- GEICO -RRB- recently passed Allstate to become the second largest insurer . GEICO reported 4.8 billion , Allstate 4.6 . 4th is Progressive at 3.9 billion . Rounding out the top 5 is Liberty Mutual , who recently barely passed Farmers , both being at 2.5 billion .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
My Partner Had A Wreck In My Car & the officer was inappropriate on top of things .
I am very sorry to hear about your partners rough morning ! I am glad that she and her passengers are ok . Unfortunately , I 'm sure that you have a pretty good idea of what the worst case scenario will be - she is an at fault motorist involved in an accident , she is not an insured in your car , your insurance company refuses to pay , and you are stuck with the repair bill , and she gets a ticket . It may work out that if you go to court , and she is able to prove that the other driver was at fault , that you may be able to file a claim against them , and maybe recoup some of your losses . Your best bet is to contact your agent , explain what happened , and ask for their advice on how to proceed . Good luck ! If there is any way that I can help , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
Annuities can be an extremely useful retirement tool . However they are often sold inappropriately . Fixed annuities arewell suited for providing a predictable income stream overan extended period of time.Every case is going to be different . A fixed annuity in combination with social security and otherinvestments can provide a balanced approach to retirement planning.Before you buy any high dollar insurance or annuities you should consult with your advisors .
There are plenty of advantages to life insurance and no disadvantages . There are disadvantage of any life insurance policy is that it may be unsuitable for the policy owner based on budget , risk tolerance , liquidity needs and inappropriate polices for the planning goal . The two indemnification policies are Term Life Insurance and Guaranteed Universal Life Insurance . There are four income cash value life insurance policies : Participating Whole Life , Current Assumption Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Variable Universal Life .
In addition to Ed Harris comment on this , there has also been a few bad agents who have sold inappropriate annuities to individuals . That is why laws have been set up to make sure that an annuity is suitable for the individual . When you purchase an annuity you must fill out a suitability form . If the company see 's that the annuity is not suitable they will not issue the annuity .
Life annuities are designed to provide a stream of income that a person can not outlive . Every variation of annuity comes from this basic idea . This is a life insurance product , with guarantees and in times of uncertainty and risk . The applications vary as the needs vary . Some annuities accumulate money for intermediate goals , such as paying for college . The other underlying dynamic of an annuity is that it is a long term savings vehicle and so it is inappropriate for most short range objectives .
Most companies will have a medical question referring to it or similar . Had a customer black out due to low blood sugar and carrier was refusing to pay due to disclosure failure . Had another customer who was blind in one eye . That carrier did not have a medical question about that -LRB- only diabetes -RRB- . customer never had a wreck with the good eye ... can not say the same for the other . He said it was not his fault he did not see it coming -LRB- did not turn his neck far around enough to look -- carrier did pay . Usually if the car is adapted for a disability no problem . They have not figured out how to adapt for blackouts for high or low sugar.Did have one customer upset that a carrier would not insure her , she explained that she only had seizures at night and saw no reason why she could not drive in the daytime .
No . Auto insurance pays to repair your car if you wreck it . It can also pay to repair other people 's cars if you hit them . To cover funeral expenses you need life insurance of some sort . There are funeral preneed insurance policies for this specific purpose or you can use any death benefit from any life insurance that is in force at the time of your death . Also your funeral planning insurance wo n't pay for your car to be repaired if you wreck it .
Depending on your carrier there are several ways . To get a rough Idea of the value of your totaled car there are several things you can do before settling for what the carrier is offering . you can check the value of your auto before it was wrecked at nada.com or Kelly blue book . Also you can contact your local car dealership and ask them what your car would of sold for and the value of it prior to the accident .
Health insurance can trace its roots back to the 1920 's in the US . The first health insurance was introduced inTexas to offset the costs of hospital stays . Blue Cross was founded specifically for this purpose . Several years later , Blue Shield was added to help offset doctor 's charges . As technological advances in the medical field particularly after WWII , costs rose rapidly . The idea of managed care was advanced with the purpose that if people would regularly schedule appointments to doctors , they could determine high risks much faster and avoid large hospital costs . In the 1970 's , the HMO -LRB- Health Maintenance Org -RRB- gained favor and under President Nixon a bill was passed that would require employers with greater than 25 employees to offer coverage through an HMO . By the early 1990 's , the demand for the flexibility of a traditional plans in addition to the cost saving of the HMO plans , brought us the PPO and the POS . Doctor Office Visit copays and prescription drug copays became the norm . The number of laws governing healthcare and what policies were required to pay increased nearly 1000 % . Technological advances were happening at a `` break-neck '' pace . With each law requiring more health issues to be covered and the advances in technology , ultimatelycaused premiums to increase dramatically . In 1993 , in TN , a $ 1000 deductible for a 35 year old male was $ 41 per month . How things have changed ! The government 's answer was to fix the financing mechanism , concluding that they could control costs by forcing the financing -LRB- aka insurance companies -RRB- to follow strict regulations . Sounds great except : - insurance companies were required to minimize the amounts they paid doctors , hospitals , etc -LRB- providers -RRB- ; while providers were having to serve twice as many patients for the same money and go into $ 100k plus in debt just to get through med school . Can you say train wreck?Which brings us to where we are today ! That maybe a bit more than you asked in questioning the original purpose of health insurance , which in simple terms , was set up to exchange premium for the possibility of an expensive hospital stay in the future .
The average cost in the US has been around $ 850 for the past several year . My data could be a bit off and old , but in the last several years competition for auto business has kept pricing static . Here is the basic issue question : I do n't know who you are in a demographic sense , but also in the sense of needing coverage to protect yourself . . Auto Insurance is regulated by the various 50 states and can a bit different in what coverages are required to be offered.But here is what typically comprises and auto policy : Bodily Injury Liability -LRB- protection for the people you kill or injure -RRB- Property Damage -LRB- for the car you hit or the 18 wheeler you force off the road unintentionally -RRB- Medical Payments for the little issue that happens in your car that you do n't want to have to file suit against some one to be indemnified -LRB- i.e. your passenger catching their finger in the closing of a door -RRB- Collision for damage to your own car in a wreck or hitting a curb or a pot hole etc. . ComprehensiveCoverage : for theft , flood , hail , falling trees , broken windshields etc And last , but probably the most important coverage on your policy , Uninsured and Under-insured Motorist Coverage So , despite all the ads to the contrary you ought to take more than 15 minutes to figure , with the help of an agent , what exposures you have . The worst scenarios have nothing to do with fixing your cars , it is about fixing peoples lives and keeping you assets . So to answer your question I would need to know what do you have to lose , if you cause injury to someone else , because what you do not pay for in insurance you will pay for on your own including future garnishment of your income . A fairly decent rule of thumb to consider things by would be to look at your lifestyle . If you already own your own home -LRB- including with a mortgage -RRB- you need a minimum of 100/300/100 spit limits of Bodily Injury Coverage -LRB- that protects the people you hit -RRB- and you should carry the same to protect yourself , your family and passengers in your car with the same limit of 100/300/100 for Uninsured and under insured motorist coverage . If you do not understand how all of these pieces of the coverage fit together then you should really seek out an Independent agent who sells for multiple companies and can tailor the policy to your needs If you live in AZ , CA , TX , GA , or MO I would be glad to assist you -LRB- call 1-866-933-4372 -RRB- -LRB- open 8 AM to 8 PM Est Monday through Friday -RRB- . If you live elsewhere seek out an Independent Agent in your area Good luck to you and I hope this answer helps some Jack Heller , CPCU
Let me add one other use for Non Owned liability coverage . You work in an occupation where the owner of the business is also the owner of the vehicle you use on a regular basis . Non owned vehicle coverage can play an important role in protecting you . Keep in mind that your employer buys coverage to protect his/her interest not yours . If you own an auto , and are faced with an employer providing basic coverage then it is called Extended Non Owned Liability coverage . If you do not own any car then it is referred to as Non Owned Liability Coverage -LRB- not Extended at that point -RRB- Non owned coverage can be a very valuable way of protecting you , your family or guest passengers in your car . Most large employers are not concerned with Uninsured Motorist or Underinsured Motorist Coverage . But you should be . In about 14 % of all wrecks the adverse driver who causes the wreck will have no insurance . so now you need the protection of uninsured and under insured motorist coverage which is not something your employer worries about -LRB- its your life not his or hers -RRB- so , be sure you buy a non owned liability policy in these circumstances and match the UM and UIM limits with your liability limit of coverage
That really depends on what you can afford for your out of pocket expense . Many will say Higher deductible keeps your rates lower . Yes this is true to a point actually how much are you really saving . In Montana that average different if the premium is not that much . The difference between a $ 100 Deductible and a $ 1000 Deductible for comprehensive if only about $ 7.00 a month difference in rate . So Yes you are spending $ 7.00 more a month but in the event of a loss you are putting $ 900 less out of your pocket . Many glass shops will waive the deductible also so there many things to think about . 1St thing is do you have enough money laying around to cover the deductible amount / If you wreck your car and take it to the shop the insurance company will pay their portion but the shop will not release your car till you pay yours . Coming up with a $ 1000 maybe much harder to come up with . I would contact your agent and ask them how much a month difference it is in the rate before you jump in to conclusion . Be advised that agents that are posting answers to this question or any question are not to be posting there business information as your last person that answered the question did . You can reach the agent answering the question by the contact them button on the side . Hope this helps you with the information you need .
Life insurance pays a death claim when you die . Car insurance pays a claim when your car is wrecked or stolen . Home owners insurance pays a claim if your home is damaged or for certain personal liabilities . Health insurance pays doctors and or hospitals when you incurr health care expenses . They are all similar but designed to do different things .
The best way to get a close guess to what they will pay for your car is to run a value of your car prior to the damage . Many use the nada.com or Kelly blue book both are online . This will give you a close price to what they will give you . Also you can contact most car dealerships and ask them the value of your car before it was wrecked .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
Market value -LRB- what others would pay for same car -RRB- with plus or minus depending on features , condition of vehcle , age , mileage -LRB- thats a big one -RRB- , type of car , quality of car , car been wrecked or under water ... As much as they cost now I recommend that you always get REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE and you get GAP COVERAGE . ALSO , GET EXTENDED WARRANTY FROM THE DEALER . I have been involved in these issues so many times that I still sit down and cry like a baby . People get it in the back so many times just because they are ignorant of coverages that are available to them ... shame shame agents and shame shame tightwad idiots
f they are in an accident you are liable for the damage if your friend wrecks and hit someone . You need to list them as drivers on your policy along with the car . Depending on how long this `` borrowing '' lasts . Montana is a permissive use policy state so if you borrowed a car to someone then they got into an accident your insurance has to cover it unless you do not have the car on the insurance policy but you also are required to have your cars insured . Now if your friends are only borrowing for a week or two then there is n't a needed to add then to your policy Hope this helps
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Humana Offer Life Insurance Products ?
Humana is a health insurance company that offers individual and group health insurance . Humana also offers supplemental life insurance for individuals and groups . For individuals , Humana offers a Junior Estate Builder for your children or grandchildren , and a Memorial Fund for people 45 - 80 to take care of final expenses . On the group insurance side , Humana offers supplemental term life insurance for employees or spouses and dependents .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
Humana is a health insurance company that offers individual and group health insurance . Humana also offers supplemental life insurance for individuals and groups . For individuals , Humana offers a Junior Estate Builder for your children or grandchildren , and a Memorial Fund for people 45 - 80 to take care of final expenses . On the group insurance side , Humana offers supplemental term life insurance for employees or spouses and dependents .
Yes ! Humana does offer Medigap plans . Of the 11 different plans in the marketplace , Humana offers Medigap plans A , B , C , F , G , K , L , N , and High-deductible F - please note , not every medigap plan may be available and may not be sold in every area . Medigap plans are the same from every company because they 're standardized by the government . The only difference between the coverage from each carrier is the price they charge for it . Price quotes are determined by the quoted plan -LRB- s -RRB- , your age , zip code , any tobacco usage , and marital status -LRB- some carriers offer rate discounts if married and if spouses applying together -RRB- . It 's important to compare the rates from every available option in your area -LRB- including Humana and every other insurer offering Medigap plans in your zip code -RRB- so you can secure your desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . If you need quotes for Humana 's Medigap plans -LRB- as well as those from other carriers to compare to as well -RRB- , please give me a call at 888-972-0024 - that connects to my office directly -LRB- not an automated system -RRB- . You can also send me an e-mail by clicking on the `` contact me '' button next to my name . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
Humana offers group Term life insurance for employees , and group Term life insurance for employees ' dependents and spouses . The company also offers group Accidental Death and Dismemberment employee coverage , in addition to group AD&D coverage for the dependents and spouses of employees . Humana does not offer a private life insurance plan to individuals at this time , but does offer an Accident Benefit to individuals .
It depends on the are you live in and your individual situation . Humana is a Medicare Advantage Plan . Each area is different . If you can not afford a Medicare Supplement then I would shop for a good Medicare Advantage Plan in your area , it may be Humana or it may be another plan such as United Health Care , Aetna , or Anthem Blue Cross . A good local agent who is certified in Medicare Advantage plans and is familiar with the plans in your area can help guide you in the right direction . Every situation is different . A medicare Advantage Plan will offer more coverage than original Medicare . A Medicare Supplement offers even better coverage because it will pay in addition to original Medicare . Humana does offer a Medicare Supplement , but make sure you shop because they may not be the best option depending on where you live . Again , a good local agent can be a great help to you .
I do n't know what a lot of doctors think about Humana . Humana offers Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C of Medicare -RRB- . Part C allows insurance companies like Humana to provide Medicare benefits . They are managed health care plans such as HMOs and PPOs . Since they are managed care plans they have networks -LRB- doctor and hospital -RRB- where they want you to receive your medical care . Medicare Advantage Plans must offer the same benefits as Original Medicare but they do not have to cover every benefit the same way . These plans can have higher out-of-pocket costs than Medicare for some benefits and are required to limit out-of-pocket cost to no more than $ 6,700 in a calendar year . Some doctors may not like to work with Humana for their Medicare patients and would prefer to use Original Medicare plus a Supplement .
Humana offers both Medicare Advantage Plans and Medicare Supplemental Insurance Plans . Humana Medicare Supplemental Plans do not replace Medicare ; they supplement the benefits offered by Medicare Part A and Part B. Humana Medicare Advantage Plans do not exactly replace Medicare , but they offer the full package of Medicare Part A and B and additional coverage in one package .
Humana 's Medicare Advantage product is a Medicare HMO or Medicare Managed Care plan and I would presume you are trying to compare it to Medicare Supplement policies . In general terms , most doctors are n't thrilled with Medicare regardless if it is traditional Medicare or the new Medicare Advantage products sold by insurance carriers such as Humana or United Healthcare due to the reimbursement -LRB- payment -RRB- levels set by the government . You provide no specifics so it is impossible to give you a definitive answer . Medicare Advantage products have to cover everything Medicare covers and generally offer an even broader range of benefits to their members . However , the trade off from the consumer 's perspective with Medicare Advantage plans is that you must stay within their network of health care providers for your care to be covered . From the health care provider 's perspective they are almost certainly presented with a different payment methodology under a Medicare Advantage plan than the fee-for-service approach they have been used to and they will find their practice of medicine under greater scrutiny for the quality and effectiveness of the care they deliver . In my experience these types of physician remarks usually boil down to manner of payment and control issues . You should find a licensed health insurance agent who sells both Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage plans who can explain the specifics of what each approach does and present each one 's advantages and disadvantages . Your doctor could be giving you good advice for your particular area or they could be expressing their own prejudices .
Humana is a good reputable health insurance company . They offer medical coverage in most states and have a very large network of physicians , specialists and hospitals . Their rates tend to be competitive in most areas and they offer comprehensive , catastrophic , HSA and many other types of policies for individuals , families and businesses . You can easily compare Humana rates with other carriers by utilizing an experienced broker . Although as brokers , we include Humana in most quotes , it 's important to understand that they may not be the best fit for all situations .
Humana can be either a Medigap or Medicare Advantage plan . They offer both options . Depending on your zip code , the Humana Medicare Advantage plan may not be available . If Humana Medigap plans are offered in your state , they would be available in any zip code . You should completely understand the difference in Advantage plans vs. Medicare supplement . In general , Advantage plans have lower premiums but considerably higher out of pocket costs . Most also have networks with severe penalties for using non-network providers . Supplement plans have higher monthly premiums , no networks , and in most cases , less than $ 500 out of pocket when your health takes a turn for the worse .
Yes , Humana 's Medicare Part D plan does cover the shingles vaccine . If you are in the Humana Medicare Advantage PPO plan , you must receive your immunization at a pharmacy that bills Express Scripts directly . Those not in the Humana Medicare Advantage PPO plans must call their respective insurance carriers to see where to get their shot . There will be a copay .
The shingles shot isnt covered by Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- or Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- . Generally , Medicare prescription drug plans -LRB- Part D -RRB- cover all commercially-available vaccines -LRB- like the shingles shot -RRB- needed to prevent illness . Zostavax -LRB- PF -RRB- is a Tier 4 medication under all three Humana Stand Alone PDPs Humana Walmart PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Preferred Rx PDP has a 35 % coinsurance after $ 320 deductible is met Humana Enhanced PDP has a 44 % coinsurance -LRB- this plan has no deductible -RRB-
Humana offers Medicare supplement plans in most states on a statewide basis . In some states Humana also has a Medicare Advantage plan that may or may not be available in your zip code or county . In Georgia the Humana Medicare supplement plan is neither the highest priced plan nor the most competitive .
Humana offers Medicare supplement plans and Medicare Advantage in some states . Their Medicare supplement plan offerings are limited in most areas . In Georgia for example , Humana only offers Medicare supplement plans A , F , K , N and High F . Some of their plans are competitive but there are almost always lower priced plans from other carriers .
Humana offers two kinds of Medicare coverage . In some areas you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan . Advantage plans vary by zip code and may not be available in your home town area . Most people will want to consider traditional Medicare and a Medigap plan . Humana only offers Medicare supplement plans A , B , C , F , K , L , N and Hi F in Georgia . Compare rates before you buy .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Assurant Heath is a health insurance company not a unique type of health insurance . They offer a wide range of both individual major medical insurance plans as well as group health insurance plans . They also offer dental insurance and supplementary insurance products . In this way Assurant Health is a competitor with Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans , Humana , AETNA , CIGNA , United Healthcare and other health insurance companies across the nation .
Medicare Supplement Plans are standardized by CMS . Humana 's Medicare Supplement Plans offer the same benefits as any insurance company who also sells Medigap plans . For example , Medigap Plan F with Humana has the exact same benefits as Medigap Plan F with Cigna -- the only difference is price . As Bob stated , there are often many other insurance companies with better premiums for the same exact Medigap Plan .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Stolen Jewelry ?
Most renters insurance provides some limited coverage for jewelry within the policy . Normally the amount of coverage provided by the policy is subject to the policy 's deductible . If you have a piece of jewelry that is valued at five hundred dollars or more you should talk to your agent aboout having that piece scheduled on an endorsement on the policy to provide the coverage that you need .
As a general rule , most homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for personal property that is stolen from a car . The stolen property will be subject to your property deductible and depending on the type of property stolen , your policy may have a limit to the coverage amount provided . For example , money , jewelry , electronic devices , and other `` high value '' items are typically limited to a maximum coverage amount of $ 500 - $ 1,000 unless your policy includes increased limits through an endorsement . As a side note , your auto policy may also include a small limit of coverage for property stolen from the vehicle .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
Let me add one point . Theft and Mysterious disappearance are two separate things . So talk with your agent . Theft coverage will respond if there is evidence of a theft . For example a broken door lock or other evidence that someone gained access to your premises . The broader coverage available from some carriers can include mysterious disappearance which is basically that the insured item is not where you believed it to be and therefore has been possibly stolen or you simply do not understand how it disappeared . Mysterious disappearance is generally more expensive than theft , and is generally purchased in-connection with protecting valuable articles of jewelry , watches and furs or other property that have their own sub limits in a homeowners or renters policy . Read the policy relative to how jewelry , watches and fine arts are protected and if it does not sound like enough coverage talk to your agent .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
Damage to jewelry typically would not be covered under a homeonwers policy . Lost or stolen jewelry is a coverage that is provided under most homeowners policies with specific limitations . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage that is provided and any exclusions that may be contained within the policy or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Mysterious disappearance is excluded under most home insurance policies and most , if not all , insurance companies will have an internal limit on jeweler y . They also limit other items such as monies & securities , fine arts , silverware , musical instrument , etc. . You can , and should , schedule your jewelry on the policy . This will give you coverage for a piece of jewelry being lost or stolen and defines the amount of coverage through an appraisal .
Renters insurance covers theft by paying for specific items of your personal property that were stolen . There may be a deductible to meet for funds are paid and there also may be limitations on specific types of property , such as jewelry ; If a theft occurs , contact the police and your broker .
Most personal property , including a bicycle , is covered under a renters policy . Recovery is reduced by the deductible . There are some types of property that are restricted such as jewelry , guns , collections and cash . Bicycles are not in the restricted category . If the bicycle is stolen while away from the residence it is subject to a limitation of ten percent of the insurance amount in most cases .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
A standard renters insurance policy does cover jewelry loss or damage , if as a result of a covered peril . However , these policies contain a limit to the amount that will be paid for each jewelry item . The limits are generally $ 1,000 or $ 1,500 for each piece or a set amount for all jewelry lost or damaged at one time by one occurrence . So , obviously you could have jewelry that is worth a lot more than you would receive in the event of a covered loss . If such a situation exists for you , consider buying additional insurance based on the values of the jewelry . This can be done on an endorsement or separate policy . Check with your agent as to your options . Also , be aware that some pieces may need to be appraised before determining the premium you will be charged .
Renters Insurance would take effect in the event of a loss to your personal property as well as peronal liability . If someone broke into your home your renters insurance would cover the stolen items , if the building were to burn down renters insurance would cover your personal property , also if you were to have your car broken into and items stolen those items would be covered under your renters insurance .
-- > Normal 0 How much Renters Insurance should you buy ? Ideally enough to replace all the stuff you have that makes up your life . Clothes , furniture , dishes , jewelry , food , books , recreational toys , etc. . Your list will be unique to you . How much insurance you purchase is important but so isnt the type of coverage you purchase and the insurer you purchase the policy from . Basic renters policies will reimburse you for the Actual Cash Value of your damaged property . That means the value of used clothing , used furniture , an old computer . You , on the other hand , will most likely need to replace your damaged property with new items . The difference between new and old is often significant . Make sure whatever limit you buy includes Replacement Cost coverage . Under this type of coverage , you are entitled to claim the value of a new item should you actually replace it with one of similar kind and quality . Of course , the most the insurer will pay will be the limit you select . If you can afford it , that limit should be at least what you would have to spend to replace all those items you could not get along without . Most renters policies provide property coverage on a Named Peril basis . In other words , the policy will state the specific type of damage your property will be covered for . To be covered you have to prove to the insurer one of the covered perils caused the damage , a process not everyone is comfortable with . It is good to have someone on your side when this occurs . Often you cant find that person that sold you your coverage on the phone or over the Internet when you have a claim . Its nice to have a local person to seek assistance from . Watch out for limitations on specific types of property . Youll most likely find one for the theft of jewelry or silver , and jewelry often includes costume jewelry . Some of these limitations can be increased for a nominal premium or your can specifically insure unusual or expensive items . Personal liability coverage will also be provided . That limit should be not less than $ 100,000 and consistent with limits you might carry on your car insurance .
USAA renters insurance policies cover jewelry . However , like most renters coverage , there will be specific limits and exclusions regarding how much would be paid on a claim . With many policies , you can add riders to broaden your coverage or specifically schedule items of jewelry . Yourpersonalbroker or an experienced broker can review with you how to best cover any jewelry you have .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses for named perils . Named perils usually include Fire , Theft , Lightning , Water -LRB- not Flood -RRB- and other acts of God . Unfortunately , losing an item is not a named peril . You would have coverage for jewelry if one of the named perils occurred but even then most policies have a limit for jewelry so check with your agent . A much better solution for jewelry is an Inland Marine or Jewelry policy . These are separate policieswith `` all risk '' coverageso anything that happens to the item it 's covered , even if you lose it .
Jewelry is covered under a homeowners policy . Most homeowners policies have an internal limit to the amount of coverage for jewelry . Under the homeowners policy the loss of jewelry is subject to the deductible on the policy . People are rarely satisfied with the adjustment made on jewelry under their homeowners policy . A jewelry floater is supplemental coverage that can be provided and it will replace the lost jewelry or pay a stated amount . This coverage must be backed up by an appraisal . There isnt usually a deductible on a jewelry floater .
If your asking will renters insurance cover a stolen car the answer is no . Auto insurance comprehensive coverage will cover a stolen car . If you asking if any of your personal items left in the car are covered for theft then the answer is theft from a vehicle is a covered peril . Now it would depend on what the item actually was that is in question and will the stolen item meet the deductible . Also if the auto was damaged during the incident you could potentially have two claims . One one the auto for the damage to the vehicle and on for your personal property that was in the vehicle . Also please note , items permanently mounted to your auto are part of the auto .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses and will cover your personal property `` any where in the world '' . If your belongings are stolen or damaged away from your residence most policies cover up to 10 % . For example , if you have a Renters policy with the following limits : Personal Property = $ 20,000 Liability = $ 300,000 Medical = $ 1,000 Deductible = $ 500 If your bike is stolen away from your apartment you would have coverage up to 10 % or $ 2,000 . Keep in mind your deductible . In the example above you would receive a check for $ 700 - $ 500 = $ 200 .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is The Cost Of Homeowners Insurance In California ?
Cost of homeowners insurance in California is based on location , replacement cost of the dwelling which would entail putting together all the characteristics of the home . Past claims experience and potential discounts you may qualify for . A California independent agent like myself could help you find the right insurance carrier at the right premium to fit your needs .
There are two ways to look at cost . One way is the annual premium . The second is to look at satisfaction when you have a claim . Sometimes a lower premium will not result in satisfaction when there is a claim . In California companies charge what it takes to cover the losses that they experience in California . A good agent can help you identify the coverage you need and the price that will represent the best value .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
All auto insurers in California are subject to prop 103 laws and guidelines . This means a DUI is chargeable for 3 years , however the person in question with the DUI will not be a California good driver for 10 years . California good driver is a 20 % discount that would not be available by any Insurer operating in California . Not being a good driver in California can potentially make you unacceptable by certain carriers that will only accept California good drivers . Work with many Insurers including Allied and depending on your situation Allied most likely will accept you as an insured but you will not get the good driver discount .
The minimum insurance requirement in California is called the financial responsibility requirement . All drivers in California are required to carry evidence that the car that they are operating is insured to these set standards . The standards are $ 15,000 per person of bodily injury liability coverage , and $ 30,000 of bodily injury liability coverage for death to more than one person . There must be % 5,000 of property damage liability insurance in place . Insurance isnt mandatory . There can be a cash deposit with the DMV of $ 35,000 , or a certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California , or a surety bond for $ 35,000 issued by a company authorized to do business in California . Insurance is the choice of most vehicle owners . The companies that insure cars in California are required to report the status of the policies of insurance electronically to the DMV . If you decide to no longer operate the automobile and it is not parked on a California highway or street , you must notify the DMV that you are suspending coverage , and why . The minimum coverage law allows you to purchase the most expensive auto insurance policy available . While it may be adequate in many circumstances , in those circumstances where the damages sustained exceed the limits of the policy the vehicle owner will discover that all of their assets are in jeopardy and there will not be anything to help the owner , except bankruptcy .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Actually California has some of the most competitive auto rates in the country due to Prop 103 . While everything else in California is expensive my clients are often pleasantly surprised that the auto insurance rates in California are not sky high . In California we have a different set of rules governed by the Prop 103 law that heavily regulates the rates in California and what an insurance carrier can charge . Insurance rates are not credit based but are heavily rated on your driving record and driving history .
Why is long term care so expensive in California ? Well , probably the main reason is the cost of care in California is also on the higher end . Insurance premium costs use the cost of care , -LRB- or repair or services , with other insurances -RRB- to generate a premium . I would imagine if you looked you might find the cost of care in the state of California is up there .
Insurance is regulated by state . Each state can adopt a different approach to the issue that you have raised . In California , the voters took rating matters into their own hands with a constitutional amendment . Sex or gender , as you say , is not a rating factor in California . That means that in California if you switch sex , switch back and switch again , nothing will change as long as you are residing in California , and driving a car insured in California .
No one in California is required to purchase homeowners insurance . A homeowners has the option of self insuring . However a lender will require a homeowner to carry homeowners insurance as a condition of your loan . This is to guarantee the lenders investment is not lost if there is a loss on the property . Once your home is paid off you may do as you wish . However in either case I strongly suggest you protect what most likely is your biggest investment is insurance .
Cost of homeowners insurance in California is based on location , replacement cost of the dwelling which would entail putting together all the characteristics of the home . Past claims experience and potential discounts you may qualify for . A California independent agent like myself could help you find the right insurance carrier at the right premium to fit your needs .
The California Department of Insurance -LRB- aka the California Insurance Commissioner 's Office -RRB- . If you are having problems with an insurer you can contact the department at 800-927-4357 if you are within the state of California or 213-897-8921 if you are outside of the state of California . You can also use their contact form , which can be found here : WEBSITELINK
In answering this question , we assume that CDL is an abbreviation for California Drivers License . If you are a California resident seeking to purchase Auto Insurance , it is assumed that you would have a California Drivers License thus not a method of lowering your insurance premium.The State of California allows insurance companies to base auto insurance premium rates on the experience of the driver ; thus the longer you are licensed , your premium would be lower . However , your driving record would be equally important as this would be another method of adjusting rates on a policy . We 'll be happy to answer any more specific questions if and when asked !
Earth movement is usually excluded in a homeowners policy . In California insurance companies are required to periodically offer homeowners earthquake coverage . This is generally written as an additional coverage or placed with specialty insurance companies . In some instances the cost for the coverage is greater than the standard homeowners policy .
In California the answer is anabsoluteyes . California is governed by proposition 103guidelinesand one of the major rating factors is driving record . Every personal lines auto insurance carrier must rate according to your driving record so 1 point will have an impact . This impact can be quite significant . 2 points in a 3 year period and you are no longer considered a California a good driver . This can cause rates to easily double in many cases . I often see clients who move in from out of state who have points on their driving record get a big shock to find out there rates areaffectedby a ticket . So what is a point you may ask . Any minor moving violation is 1 point . A major moving violation can be 2 points with a DUI coming in at 4 points . A minor at-fault accident is 1 point . A at-fault accident that includes bodily injury is 2 points . You may attend traffic school for a minor violation in most areas once every 18 months . All the rest you just have to wait out the 3 years until the points drop off your record . Also some insurance carriers reward drivers for clean driving records that go beyond 3 years so even though your points may have dropped off you still may not be receiving the best rates possible until 5-7 years . And by the way , Insurance carriers in California will check the driving record once a year minimum if not more often . If you move from one carrier to the next an upfront motor vehicle record is always ran .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
Every year , make and model of automobile is assigned a specific symbol . The symbols are alphabetical . The symbol tracks the experience the industry and the company have with that particular year , make and model . As you can imagine a manufacturer like Mercedes Benz has a wide variety of symbols . The symbol is but a part of the computation of the premium . The insurance companies in California are restricted to a few criteria to further evaluate the risk . The California insurers will look at the driving record of every driver in the household and will assess points if there are violations present , particularly with the assigned driver . The points based upon a drivers record have a compounding effect because in California a driver with less than two points is considered a good driver and awarded a substantial discount . Another factor that influences the company is the presence of inexperienced drivers . The accident record of the household is also considered closely . Claims for bodily injury receive a great deal of scrutiny . Most points given for accidents or violations remain on the driving record for three years . Racing and DUI convictions remain on the record for ten years . In California the distance you driver your Mercedes Benz each year is also a part of the computation . Services are available to insurance companies that track your mileage every time the vehicle is serviced . These services project you annual mileage and companies use bands of factors to develop the final premium . There are a few additional factors considered such as location where the car is being garaged , and occupation of the drivers in the household , Most automobile insurance is rated by a computer with little additional input from a live underwriter or agent . All of this information is used to compile a premium that the insurance company considers adequate for the risk . If approved by the computer , the agent is authorized to issue the policy and subject to potential additional review , the policy is in force .
When you are convicted of a DUI you will be required to notify the DMV of your financial responsibility . That will trigger a reaction by your insurer . They will know immediately that you have been convicted of DUI . What they do at that point will vary . At renewal you will find that you have been assessed points for the DUI and those points will trail you for 10 years in California . In California you will also lose your good drivers discount . Sometimes clients think that this is the time to shop for auto insurance . Unless you simply can not pay the premium , dropping coverage at this stage is not in your best interests . Your existing insurance company is likely to treat you with more consideration than any subsequent insurance company . By the time you pay the fine , pay for the drivers education course and face the doubling of your auto premiums you will determine that drinking and driving does not pay in California .
In California insurance company underwriters do not take your credit score into consideration when approving a homeowners policy . If there was a claim in the past that appeared to have been arson , they might take a closer look . Incidentally , auto insurers in California do not pull your credit score either .
Unlike automobile insurance , California does not require a homeowner to have an insurance policy . The mortgage company will almost always require an insurance policy on which they are named as mortgagee . That protects their interests . However , few homeowners can be sued or lose their home in a fire and not feel financial pain . That is the purpose of the homeowners policy , to share that risk with others so that if it should happen to you , you can be made whole .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Does Life Insurance Cost Per Year ?
There is no set cost for life insurance like there is for Medicare or homeowner 's insurance . Life insurance comes in a large variety of term and permanent products , and each option has a different price structure , not to mention the difference in prices between companies . The price also depends on your age , health , and how much you need . To get some samples of life insurance rates , you can visit a website that offers instant quotes . Input your info and actual life insurance rates will come up at the end . You can even change the data on some websites like ours , so that you can review the prices for different types of policies .
Life insurance is a mortality product . Your cost to buy life insurance is directly tied to your own mortality . Mortality is measured by several factors : your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . It also takes into account your behaviors like motor vehicle violations , dangerous recreational activities or hazardous vocations . All these factors contribute to the premium youll pay .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
`` Life insurance per unit '' is the cost of life insurance per thousand dollars of coverage . Child Riders are priced per unit . E.g. a $ 10,000 child rider may cost $ 60 per year , or $ 6.00 per unit . Flat extras are also charged by unit . The insurance company may add on $ 7.50 per unit of life insurance for 3 years after having surgery for prostate cancer . For a $ 100,000 policy , that would add on $ 750 per year , but then the flat extra would drop off after three years and the policy would cost $ 750 less . You can also price your own policy if you know the cost of one unit of life insurance . E.g. . If you are buying a final expense policy that costs $ 50 per unit , a $ 10,000 policy will cost $ 500 per year .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost per person in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . You may also have options for group coverage through your employer . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When looking at the average cost of Medicare Part C a person should consider the monthly premium as well as the out of pocket costs throughout the year . In many states the premium for a Medicare Part C -LRB- or Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- can be $ 0 per month to $ 50 per month . However , the max out of pocket costs can be as much as $ 6,700 per year . You will also want to make sure you are happy with the network of doctors and hospitals that are available to you . Going to a provider outside of the network can cost you a lot more . You may also need to get a referral before seeing a specialist . In contrast , those that have a Medicare Supplement Plan have a monthly premium but have far less out of pocket costs throughout the year . There is also no network which means you can see any doctor or hospital you like . You also do not need to worry about getting a referral for a specialist . The benefits of a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- can not change from year to year . An independent agent will be able to help get you all the information so that you can decide which is better for your specific situation . For more information about Medicare visit our website .
Disability Income Insurance evaluates health factors , so the cost of the policy will depend on how the applicant is rated health wise . If a nonsmoker who is of normal weight and has no health history , Preferred ratings can be given . The price also depends on the risk of the occupation , how much income the applicant makes -LRB- and how much of that income they want to replace in case of disability -RRB- , and what bells and whistles they want on their policy . For a 40 year old male office worker who makes $ 60,000 per year , the price can be as good as $ 50 per month for a plan that will last to age 65 .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
I love this question . I have been a Life Insurance agent for close to 30 years and I have no clue . I see commercials that say `` Only 1 $ per unit '' Or `` Only $ 1 per unit per day '' Call the 800 # and you get the `` well it depends ... '' If they do not know how is the public supposed to know ? As an agent it can mean $ 1,000 of base coverage or it can mean $ 1,000 , $ 5,000 or even $ 10,000 in child rider . The majority of Life Insurance is sold `` per $ 1,000 '' The cost per thousand is determined by many factors such as age , sex , health and type and amount of coverage . While it is easy to use a calculator to come up with a monthly quote . It takes an experienced agent to come up with a quote that truly represents what you may qualify for . Not some low ball cost per unit .
On Employer sponsored group plans the minimum cost is 50 % of the group rate of the employees , which is usually the median rate of the employees added together . But , the employer can elect to pay more than 50 % , just no less of the employees premiums . Ex . you have 5 employees that have an underwritten group rate of $ 200 per month per employee , or $ 2,400 per year x 5 employees = $ 12,000 x 50 % , which is $ 6,000 per year . But , this does not include coverage for dependents or the tax implications . That is just the bottom line dollar cost , before any adjustments , and does not take into account the type of insurance coverage selected . There are several ways to get employee coverage , this example of a group plan is just the most common .
How much does the average person pay for life insurance ? Based on my 32 years in the business as a broker -LRB- and there is no right or best answer -RRB- , I would estimate between $ 15 and $ 150 per month . This is , of course , `` per person . '' Term policies are much cheaper than permanent policies and of course that would impact the amount each person pays . And ... each person has different amounts of coverage they carry . You can purchase term coverage for under $ 100 per year depending on age and face amount . But because of economies of scale , that may not be such a good idea . You may be able to double the coverage for slightly more . Quite simply , there will be tremendous variations in the amount that consumers pay for their coverage . A fully-licensed -LRB- full-time -RRB- broker will help you find the lowest prices .
That depends on how long you could live without your paycheck . Long term disability insurance is designed to replace a portion of your income if you were to become sick or injured and could no longer work . Consider how much your ability to make an income is worth . If you make $ 50,000 per year and assuming you never got another raise and were planning on working for 30 more years , your income would be worth $ 1,500,000 -LRB- $ 50,000 X 30 -RRB- . This about it this way ... if your car is worth $ 15,000 and lets assume you pay $ 100 per month for car insurance . If your income is worth $ 1,500,000 , does n't it make sense to pay $ 100 per month for a long term disability policy to protect that ?
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Do I Borrow Against My Life Insurance ?
If you have permanent life insurance , like whole life , you can borrow against it , from any equity which you would have earned , after about two years . You merely contact your life insurance agent , or the carrier direct if you do not have an agent any longer , and inform them of your desire to borrow against your policy . They will send you a form asking for the relevant information . All this can be done within one day . You can then have the funds direct deposited into your checking account or have a check sent to you . Thank you . GARY LANE .
You can borrow from your life insurance policy by contacting your insurance company and requesting a loan . You may need to complete a form and you usually can borrow up to 90 % of the cash value . The specifics will be detailed in your policy wording . In Canada , when you borrow you will trigger a taxable gain if the amount borrowed exceeds the adjusted cost base . Be sure to check with the company concerning any tax consequences involved with borrowing . When/if you repay the loan you will receive a credit for this . Using the policy as collateral and borrowing from a bank does not trigger a taxable gain . A reminder , if you do not pay the interest on the loan , it will compound and could put the policy at risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
That is a great question ! You need to have a whole life policy to be able to borrow anything . Term policies have no cash value to borrow from , so the first step is to determine what policy you have . The second step is to see how long the policy has been in force . If it has only been a year or two , in most cases there wo n't be anything yet to borrow . If the policy is a few years old , the company can tell you what your borrowable amount is . They will send you a form , and after processing it , a check . Hope that helps , and thanks for asking !
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Is borrowing against a policy a good idea ? Yes , it can be , it can depend though . Keeping the policy in force is important as it creates some tax advantages on the funds borrowed as you are essentially taking a part of your death benefit early for use elsewhere . Where borrowing against your life insurance is a good idea is in what steps you have to take to do compared to other avenues . Have you ever sat in a bank office cubicle while someone else decides if your need is worthy enough ? How they have to decide if your need fits ? A great thing about borrowing against your value is you simply make a call and the money is wired to your bank account . You are not asked to explain your need , your need is not subjected to review by somebody else . Simply put , what you want to do with those funds is not subject to the approval of somebody else .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In Canada , when you borrow against your life insurance policy the amount you can borrow in stated in the life insurance policy . Important to remember , when you ask for a loan quote , to ask what if any of the amount borrowed will be taxable . Borrowing against a policy directly from the insurance company is considered a `` deemed disposition '' and can trigger a taxable event . When / if you repay the amount you receive a `` tax credit '' . Borrowing directly is private . If you use the policy as collateral from a bank , the loan is not a `` deemed disposition '' and therefore does not trigger a taxable event . The amount you can borrow varies , however , guidelines range from 50 % to 90 % depending on the type of policy and investment . There are consequence and alternatives to borrowing they should be discussed with a good local agent to ensure that you are informed . On a planning note , there are a number of strategies , that leverage individual and corporate borrowing . If you have further questions , contact me . If you are in Nova Scotia , you can request a complimentary strategy session at www.jpw.ca .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
At no time in the life of Term policies do they have cash value to borrow against , so no you can not borrow against a term policy . Additionally you can not use a term life policy as collateral for a loan as you can with a Whole Life policy . Credit term policies are designed to pay off a debt in the case of death of the debtor before the credit is repaid . On the other hand , Whole Life policies have cash value , grow wealth tax free , may be used as collateral and may be borrowed against . Contact me for more information .
You can borrow against permanent life insurance -LRB- also called cash value life insurance -RRB- policies that have enough cash value for borrowing . The two major types of permanent life insurance are Whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life includes fixed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . It is imperative to make sure that you do n't borrow too much from the policy and cause it to lapse . A lapsed policy with a loan against it can result in tax implications for the policy owner .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Borrowing against a 401k is both a yes and no answer as to debt . No it is not traditional debt as showing against your credit score or debt to earnings ratio , because you are borrowing your own money . It is debt as Jim mentioned , because it must be repaid within 9 months . The tax and penalty consequences are much worse than borrowing the money from a lender . It is never advised to borrow from your 401k because you are borrowing from your own future . A simple rule is if you need money today while you are able to earn an income , you will need money when you are old and sick and ca n't earn an income .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Where To Purchase Disability Insurance ?
There are several brokerage companies online that offer several disability companies . It 's important to have a well represented inventory of disability companies to compare benefits and premium payments for a competitive analysis . Shopping online can help you secure a competitive bid as long as you 're fore right about your health history , current medical condition and you can substantiate your income .
Disability brokers have websites and offices where you can go to purchase a Disability Insurance policy . Individual online Life and Health Insurance agencies also often carry Disability Insurance . Or , as in our case , they use the services of a Disability Insurance broker to help their clients get the best price and options .
Disability insurance is a complex product . There are so many different types of plans , with a great variety of additional options available that you are best served working with an independent life insurance broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
When do long term disability benefits end ? Well there are several possibilities where a long term disability policy ends . First , you get better and return to work . Second , the limits set by your choice when you purchased the policy . Finally , the definition of disability or type of disability can change within the policy and end it . This is why it is so important to read the definition of disability and if the definition changes during a disability .
To buy Disability Insurance online , go to a website that sells Disability Insurance and request a quote . It is very difficult to obtain an instant DI -LRB- Disability Insurance -RRB- quote because there are so many variables to DI policies . So using an online Contact Us form or emailing the website email address might work best . Keep in mind that many online websites that only give instant quotes for Life Insurance , also offer Disability Insurance quotes from a number of DI carriers -LRB- as our website does -RRB- . That is because licensed Life agents can also sell DI , and many of the same companies that offer good Life insurance policies also offer good Disability Insurance policies . Again , calling or emailing the website is your best way to determine where and how to purchase Disability Insurance online .
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
When you purchase Disability Insurance , you get a policy that pays you monthly , as you would have received your paycheck in the past , if you become disabled . If you are already disabled and looking for insurance , you will not be able to purchase Disability Insurance . But you can purchase Life Insurance . The type of Life Insurance depends on the cause and extent of your disability . Give an impaired risk life insurance agent a call to see what options are available . to you .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
How to choose disability insurance ? Well , first thing you check before rates and dollars paid out is the `` definition '' of disability . This is the only thing that matters as if you do not meet the definition of disability the policy will not pay out . The next is how long does the duration of the definition of disability last ? Is it different durations for different disabilities ? A policy is only as good as the definitions it pays from . Words are so very important with disability insurance . Unlike life insurance where death pretty much determines the payout , disability has to meet a definition within the policy to be paid out .
Disability brokers have websites and offices where you can go to purchase a Disability Insurance policy . Individual online Life and Health Insurance agencies also often carry Disability Insurance . Or , as in our case , they use the services of a Disability Insurance broker to help their clients get the best price and options .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
end question
start question
annuities
Do Annuities Have RMD ?
A tax deferred annuity is an insurance product . RMD is an acronym for required minimum distributions at age 701/2 in a qualified plan . You can have an annuity in a qualified plan as a funding vehicle . At age 701/2 , you would have to take required minimum distributions from your annuity -LRB- if that 's the only product in your plan . -RRB-
To build on what Steve wrote . Annuities can be a great tool to satisfy the RMD requirement . A Fixed Annuity can be `` Annuitized '' , meaning they take a portion , or all of the funds and create a yearly or monthly income to pay you for the rest of your life . This Annuitization will satisfy the RMD requirement . it will also maximize the amount of income you receive when compared to taking the standard RMD withdrawals . This can be accomplished through Annuitizing a Deferred Fixed Annuity , using an Income Rider on an Indexed Annuity , or transferring funds into a Lifetime Income Annuity .
To build on what Steve wrote . Annuities can be a great tool to satisfy the RMD requirement . A Fixed Annuity can be `` Annuitized '' , meaning they take a portion , or all of the funds and create a yearly or monthly income to pay you for the rest of your life . This Annuitization will satisfy the RMD requirement . it will also maximize the amount of income you receive when compared to taking the standard RMD withdrawals . This can be accomplished through Annuitizing a Deferred Fixed Annuity , using an Income Rider on an Indexed Annuity , or transferring funds into a Lifetime Income Annuity .
RMDs -LRB- required minimum distributions -RRB- impact most qualified retirement plans . So whatever products were used to fund those are subject to RMDs , including annuities . The biggest impact of an annuity in a qualified plan is the loss of tax free basis and the special treatment it receives in lifetime annuitization . But in general terms annuities can be managed to comply with RMDs .
RMDs are required minimum distributions fro a qualified plan that must be generated at age 701/2 . All qualified retirement accounts are subject to the RMD regulation . This includes annuities in a qualified plan . Tax deferred annuities outside a qualified plan are not subject to the RMD distribution rules .
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
If you 're healthy -LRB- and even better if you 're married and your spouse is also healthy -RRB- you can leverage your RMDs -LRB- required minimum distributions -RRB- to purchase life insurance , that if set up correctly , can distribute a tax free lump sum that can be split among your beneficiaries . You could consider taking more distributions than your RMDs and do the same for your grandchildren .
A tax deferred annuity is an insurance product . RMD is an acronym for required minimum distributions at age 701/2 in a qualified plan . You can have an annuity in a qualified plan as a funding vehicle . At age 701/2 , you would have to take required minimum distributions from your annuity -LRB- if that 's the only product in your plan . -RRB-
Yes a pension is a qualified plan . Meaning you have not paid taxes on that money , so when you begin to take disbursements , it will be taxable @ your current income bracket . If you have not taken any distributions , you will be required to take a Required Minimum Distribution , or `` RMD '' , the year following your 70 & 6 months birthday.If you want to pass that money on to a beneficiary rather than use the money yourself . You can convert that fund to a Roth IRA , pay the tax now , & pass the money on to your beneficiaries later on.No RMD required in a Roth IRA . A living trust is the best instrument to insure that your wishes are carried out to the letter . A will is simply instructions to the probate court .
Qualified retirement plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s -LRB- under ERISA -RRB- may use tax deferred annuities as a funding product . Using tax deferred annuities in a qualified plan subjects the annuity to the rules of RMD distribution and the re-characterization of basis as taxable as ordinary income at the plan participants effective tax bracket rate .
The differences between Annuities and IRA 's is pretty simple . IRA 's are considered qualified meaning you have to follow the limitations to how much you can contribute . Annuities by themselves do not have any limitations other than any limitations insurance companies put on them which are always higher . IRA 's are subject to RMD 's or required minimum distributions meaning at at 701/2 , you will be required to start taking distributions from your IRA as outlined in IRS rules .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies will set a commencement date far enough ahead into the future to show you an impressive number for your return , and that is the date by which you must have started taking your withdrawals . The truth is that you can take money out at any time , BUT - there are serious consequences if you are n't careful . An annuity is not a suitable product for someone who has cash flow issues , and might need the money sooner than later . I 'd advise you to look at your policy , and look for these things : Do I have a free withdrawal amount , if so , how much and when can I start taking it ? How long is the surrender period , and what are the charges ? -LRB- If the surrender period is ten years , that means every year during that period , whatever you withdraw will be subject to that fee , among likely others , as well as a federal penalty of 10 % if you are younger than 591/2 -RRB- The last thing to look at is what triggers if you pull money out . Does it start , or lock in a payment cycle for you ? Again , that could be disastrous if you are n't very careful . Let the money ride in there as long as you can afford to , -LRB- at least until you are 60 -RRB- and then start taking your withdrawals . Depending on how your annuity is structured , you may be required to start your rmd 's at the age of 701/2 . If you 'd like help with your specifics , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
The whole idea of a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is that you defer taxation on the deposit and the earnings of the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- until a later date . The assumption is that you will be avoiding a high tax now for a low tax later . The irony is that is not always the case . The IRS will not only tax your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- but they will force you to take withdrawals at a predetermined rate after you reach seventy and a half years of age , unless you are still working . While you can not avoid paying the tax , there are schemes that would allow you to take the Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMD -RRB- each year and hopefully preserve the money in the fund . However , when you die , your beneficiaries will have the privilege of paying the taxes on the money .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
Yes , if your company offers both you can have both , however the total contribution for both accounts combined can not exceed the IRS contribution limits between the two accounts . The value in having both is for tax diversification in the future . The traditional 401K will require taxes to be paid on distributions in the future , and is subject to RMD , where the Roth is not .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Genworth Long Term Care Insurance Good ?
There are less than a dozen good companies remaining in the long term care insurance market . And half of those are excellent long term care insurance companies . Genworth is among the best , especially with its latest policy rendition . And if it means anything , your humble responder -LRB- me -RRB- owes Genworth .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
AARP no longer provides long-term care insurance . Genworth withdrew its `` affinity marketing agreement '' to accept applications for a special plan of LTCi designed for the AARP members , effective June 1 of this year . Genworth will continue serving policyowners that have previously purchased the Genworth AARP contract and will , of course , pay all legitimate claims . AARP reported that they are not looking for a new carrier to take Genworth 's place at this time , but would be acceptable to negotiating with any LTCi carrier that might come forward with a proposal . The largest and perhaps most vocal advocate for those over 50 in the US , and a major source of educational material on health-related issues for seniors , AARP said that they will continue to provide information about long-term care planning and the roll long-term care insurance might play in such planning .
Genworth life insurance is simply life insurance sold by Genworth Financial Inc. . Genworth carries a number of life insurance products -LRB- including Term Life , Universal Life and Indexed Universal Life -RRB- and other products -LRB- including Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities and Mortgage Insurance -RRB- . To obtain a Genworth Life Insurance quote visit one of the free quote engines on the internet .
There are less than a dozen good companies remaining in the long term care insurance market . And half of those are excellent long term care insurance companies . Genworth is among the best , especially with its latest policy rendition . And if it means anything , your humble responder -LRB- me -RRB- owes Genworth .
There is a small inventory of long term care insurance companies left in the market place . While there are other companies these appear to be the real players in Long term care insurance : Mutual of Omaha , John Hancock , Med America , Trans america and Genworth . keep in mind that some long term care insurance riders are attached to life and annuity contracts as a supplement to elder care for seniors .
The best long term care insurance company and its product must be determined by gender , age , smoking status , health history and current health condition . That being said , there are only a half dozen or so long term care insurance companies in the brokerage market . Genworth should be considered as a leader in the long term care insurance market .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
There are few long term care insurance companies on the market , so its fairly easy to review the half dozen companies that occupy the long term care market . Here are some of the more recognized names in long term care insurance : Transamerica , Genworth , Mutual of Omaha , Med-America and John Hancock to name a few .
There are several long term care insurance companies of note : Genworth , John Hancock , Life Secure , Transamerica , Medamerica , Equitable and Aetna . The long term care market place is limited by a dozen companies after several companies withdrew from selling long term care .
Its always difficult to select one company , but heres my recommendation : The best long term care insurance company and its product must be determined by gender , age , smoking status , health history and current health condition . That being said , there are only a half dozen or so long term care insurance companies in the brokerage market . Genworth should be considered as a leader in the long term care insurance market .
To get a quote for Genworth Long Term Care Insurance you can visit a website that brokers long term care insurance for several companies . You will need to call , as the cost of any long term care insurance policy will depend on your age , health , and the features of the policy you choose . Talking to a knowledgeable agent can help you save money and get the features you really need .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
There are a limited group of insurance companies left in the long term care market place . Premium prices vary between those carriers , but generally , they 're within a reasonable spread of each other . Contract definitions are the most important part of product due diligence with morbidity product lines like long term care . It 's important to seek out online experts who sell the top companies and can explain the policy provisions to your understanding . A leading long term care insurance company is Genworth .
It depends on gender , age , smoking status , health condition and whether you use two lives on one policy . A 60 year old male and female , both nonsmokers and in good health can secure an excellent long term care policy for both for $ 300 a month for a base policy . There are several excellent Long Term Care Insurance Companies in the extended care market . And singling out the best can be a difficult choice given the variables of gender , age smoking status and health condition as well as the premium price tag for the benefits purchased . But that being said the overall winner would be Genworth .
There are only about a half dozen long term companies left in the market place that offer traditional standalone polices on long term care insurance . Each company has policy provisions that are distinctive and can be somewhat tailored for certain groups . But with all that said , the overall long term care insurance company recommendation is Genworth .
Genworth Financial , Inc. is a Fortune 500with more than $ 100 billion in assets , domiciled out of Richmond Virginia and has a worldwide presence in 25 countries . Its first policy was written 1871 , under The Life Insurance Company of Virginia . Genworth is a major manufacture of life insurance , annuities and long term care insurance .
There are several long term care insurance companies that offer quality contracts for those seeking coverage for assisted living and nursing home care in their senior years during retirement . Each company has their areas of specialty based on the proposed insureds specific medical and personal information . Genworth is a leading long term care insurance company .
There are many companies that offer long term care hybrid products , but these are the main brokerage carriers in the U.S. : Genworth , John Hancock , MedAmerica , Mutual of Omaha and United of Omaha . Each one has a specific sub market , but overall Genworth appears to emerge as the leader of this list .
Genworth is a leading manufacturer and distributor of long term care insurance . Their long term care policies cover various options of elderly care from assisted living at home to nursing home confinement . The contract offers additional riders like the inflation rider that can mitigate rise in the cost of living .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For A Quad Cane ?
Yes , Medicare will pay for a quad cane if it is prescribed by a doctor as medically necessary for support in walking . An exception might be if you were using a walker and went `` backwards '' to using a cane . Medicare will not pay for a downgrade like that , but would pay for an upgrade -LRB- e.g. single point cane upgrade to quad cane -RRB- .
Yes , Medicare will pay for a quad cane if it is prescribed by a doctor as medically necessary for support in walking . An exception might be if you were using a walker and went `` backwards '' to using a cane . Medicare will not pay for a downgrade like that , but would pay for an upgrade -LRB- e.g. single point cane upgrade to quad cane -RRB- .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
Medicare Part B covers DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including hospital beds , canes , walkers and wheelchairs . To qualify your doctor must prescribe the devices and you must use a Medicare approved DME provider . Be sure to ask if they accept assignment . The nursing homes I have visited have their own wheel chairs . I am not sure why you need or want Medicare to pay for yours .
Unfortunately , knee walkers are not normally paid for by Medicare . If you can get a doctor 's prescription saying that crutches or canes will not provide the support needed , it may be possible for Medicare Part B to cover a knee walker . However , providers of knee walkers generally state that Medicare does not cover this type of walker at this point in time , and under most circumstances .
Yes . Of course an appropriate diagnosis and recommendation for treatment will have to be made and you will want to exhaust any other less intrusive forms of treatment before you or your health insurance carrier should want to be replacing your original parts . But knee replacements , when medically necessary , are routinely covered services subject to whatever deductible , coinsurance and/or copayments are in your health insurance policy . The state of the art in replacement surgeries for knees and hips have advanced rapidlyand are far less traumatic than they were just a few years ago . I have a friend who recently had hip socket replacement surgery done on an outpatient basis who went in for the procedure early in the morning and walked out using a cane by mid-afternoon .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare coinsurance is the amount you must pay after satisfying your Medicare Part A or Part B deductible . Medicare Part A has a per admission deductible -LRB- $ 1184 in 2013 -RRB- . After paying your deductible most hospital charges are covered by Medicare for the first 60 days . After that Medicare pays a portion and you pay the rest -LRB- coinsurance -RRB- . Medicare Part B also has a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- . After that , Medicare pays 80 % of approved plans and you pay the coinsurance , or the remaining 20 % .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Does Life Insurance Cost For A 20 Year Old ?
Of course , how much life insurance costs for a 20 year old depends on how much life insurance the 20 year old is purchasing , how long they want the premium to be locked in , whether they have any health problems , and if they want to purchase a policy that requires an exam or goes with a quick policy requiring no medical exam . For a very healthy nonsmoker at age 20 , who is purchasing $ 100,000 of 30 year level Term without having to take an exam , the price is about $ 25/month . This is much less if you take an exam .
Of course , how much life insurance costs for a 20 year old depends on how much life insurance the 20 year old is purchasing , how long they want the premium to be locked in , whether they have any health problems , and if they want to purchase a policy that requires an exam or goes with a quick policy requiring no medical exam . For a very healthy nonsmoker at age 20 , who is purchasing $ 100,000 of 30 year level Term without having to take an exam , the price is about $ 25/month . This is much less if you take an exam .
The cost of Term Life Insurance for a 65 year old will depend on the following : 1 -RRB- The gender of the applicant . At age 65 , men pay much higher premiums than women . 2 -RRB- The length of the term . There is a big difference between the price of 10 year Term and 20 year Term at age 65 because mortality rates rise so much as we age . 3 -RRB- The health of the applicant . Health conditions can make a huge difference in premium . For a 65 year old woman in excellent health , a 10 year term policy of $ 100,000 can cost as little as $ 35/mo . For a male of the same health , the rates jump up about $ 20/mo . For a 65 year old male with standard health , that same policy would cost about $ 90/mo . If you extend it to 20 year term , the price is nearly double . Shopping among multiple carriers can be of great benefit at age 65 , because the variances in premium are greater than when you were younger . Some companies even give preferential underwriting to older persons . Please feel free to contact me if you would like me to research your best rate from the many companies we carry .
The reason that life insurance premiums go up with age is because mortality rates go up the longer someone lives . When someone buys a 10 year term life insurance policy at age 20 , the rates will not be much higher than at age 30 , because the death rate for 30-40 year old persons does not vary much . However , the rates for a 10 year term policy will be much higher for a 60 year old person than a 50 year old person , because mortality rates go up a lot between ages 60-70 , especially for men .
The percentage of the population that will die at a given age increases with age . That is , there will be a higher percentage of 50 years die in a given year than 20 year olds . That is why term life insurance is more expensive for a 50 year old than it is for a 20 year old . Imagine what the cost would be fore term life insurance for a 90 year old . The choice then , is to purchase a policy that will pay a death benefit should you die in the next term -LRB- 10 20 years for example . -RRB- The problem is that you are likely , very likely to live longer than the term . If you still want the death benefit paid to those you love , you must take steps to get a longer term policy , in which case you will probably still outlive the policy term , or buy a whole life policy . The whole life policy will have an initial premium that is greater than the term insurance premium , because it is going to pay the death benefit sometime and it guarantees not to increase the premium , ever . The whole life policy can do this because it accumulates reserves in anticipation of the increasing frequency of death claims as you age . These accumulated reserves become the cash value of the policy . Because the premium for term insurance increases as you become older there will be as point at which the whole life insurance purchased at an earlier age will be cheaper than the term policy purchased at an increased age . The cash value gives the policyholder the flexibility to make adjustments over time . It provides a cash reserve or emergency fund and a loan can be taken against the policy . If the coverage is no longer necessary it can be surrendered and the cash value will be given to the owner of the policy .
That 's too vague of a question . It depends on many factors . It mainly depends on how much death benefit you want and how likely you are to die while the policy is covering you . If you are a healthy 25-year old and want 20-year term it 's going to be cheap . You can get millions of dollars of coverage for very little premium . Because if you do n't die before age 45 you wo n't have cost the insurance company anything . It 's pure profit for them . If you are an 80-year old with a history of heart attacks and a cancer survivor , it will cost much more than that for a $ 10,000 burial whole-life policy . But that 's because the burial policy is going to COST the insurance company money . They are certainly going to have to pay a claim on that one .
Life insurance rates for smokers may be less expensive than you realize ! Of course , as experienced brokers , our job is to shop , compare and find the lowest prices with the help of our top-rated websites and modern software . Nicotine use is one of the underwriting factors considered when determining rates . However , other factors , such as use of medications , existing conditions and height/weight will also factor in the determination of prices . A few general estimates from top-rated companies : -LRB- Rates are monthly for a healthy smoker...10-year guarantee -RRB- : $ 39 - $ 250,000 40 year old male $ 19 - $ 100,000 40 year old male $ 33 - $ 250,000 40 year old female $ 60 - $ 500,000 40 year old female $ 29 - $ 250,000 30 year old male ALSO ... $ 109.86 - $ 500,000 40 year old male 20-year guarantee
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
The price of life insurance for a 40 year old depends on the health , tobacco use , weight , and gender of the applicant , in addition to how much life insurance is purchased and what type of policy is bought . Short term policies cost much less than permanent policies . Policies for smokers usually cost at least double the rate of policies for nonsmokers . Coverage for those with serious health conditions can cost 10 times or more of the premium for a 40 year old with perfect health . To get an estimate of a life insurance quote for a 40 year old with your characteristics , you can run a quote on an website advertising `` instant life insurance quotes '' . You can input different amounts and different types of policies to see how rates differ for different scenarios .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
If you are considering term insurance please ask yourself these questions . How old am I ? If I buy 20 year term now how old will I be when I have to buy another policy ? Does it meet your needs to buy term life considering the objective of the policy ? The purpose of term has always been to allow the purchaser to invest the difference between the cost of term life and permanent coverage . How much are you `` investing '' now ? Every policy you have means you are paying `` administrative costs '' for that policy . What if you have one good size permanent policy purchased at your current age to meet all your life insurance needs or can you buy a term life and then be able to meet your financial objectives and not have to buy another life insurance policy ? Finally , you need to have a personal advisor that puts your needs first and has the integrity to make recommendations based on your TOTAL financial plan and not some life insurance agent pedaling life insurance
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A million dollar policy for a 70 year old preferred non-smoker will be around $ 9785 10 year term , $ 14510 15 year term , $ 21600 for 20 year term , $ 23828 Guaranteed UL . A million dollar policy for a 70 year old standard non-smoker will be around $ 12825 10 year term , $ 22110 15 year term , $ 25930 for 20 year term , $ 32840 Guaranteed UL .
Not all 20 year term policies mean the same thing . My company offered a 20 year non-renewable term policy which meant that the company would pay a death benefit to the beneficiary if the insured died during the precise 20 year period covered by the policy . The premium on that policy would remain level throughout the 20 year period . No benefits existed after the policy terminated . Today they offer a 20 year term policy that provides the same death benefit as before and the premiums remain the same as before , however , the policy can be renewed after the 20th year and for many years after that . The policy will terminate at which time coverage can not be renewed . The premium after the first 20 years is considerably more expensive than in the first twenty years . My company also offers Cash Value Term which for a slightly higher initial premium develops cash value . It works much like the other 20 year term policies except that at the conclusion of the 20 year period there are a variety of options that allow the policy to remain in force for a lower premium or select a permanent , reduced death benefit .
How much does life insurance cost for a 24 year old ? Well with all types of insurance , provided you are a healthy individual , the price is pretty low . While Term is cheap at this age , so is permanent coverage and a young person should consider the real advantage of locking in their coverage while it is low cost and has the most time to work in their favor . I am so glad as a 53 year old who at 24 was a very atheletic , fit individual who contracted diabetes at 40 and had a bout with A FIB -LRB- heart problem -RRB- at 53 that I locked up my life insurance in my 20 's , when my good health allowed me to purchase it for cheap money . My rates are locked in , I own the policy , they ca n't take it away , they ca n't make me requalify , the policy does n't `` end '' before I do . This is n't even taking intoaccount all the other benefits a permanent policy provides , but the factit 's `` mine '' I `` own '' it , I do n't rent it .
A 2 million dollar life insurance policy will cost much different rates for men and women , young adults and seniors , smokers and nonsmokers , those with perfect health and those who have multiple health conditions . The price also varies greatly according to how long the premium is locked in . Here are some examples of the cost of a 2 million dollar life insurance policy for a 40 year old male who has perfect health . 10 year term - approx $ 50/mo 20 year term - approx $ 100/mo 30 year term - approx $ 200/mo Permanent - approx $ 800/mo You can go to a website that offers instant quotes to see what a $ 2,000,000 policy costs at other ages , genders , etc. .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
end question
start question
annuities
What Are Contingent Annuities ?
Contingent annuities do not make payments to the beneficiary until a specified event triggers the payment to begin . This condition is set up when the annuity is secured . E.g. . The payment of the annuity may be contingent upon the death of the annuity holder , or upon the beneficiary retiring or becoming disabled .
Contingent deferred annuities are annuities with contingent deferred sales charges . This sales charge is a surrender charge that represents the costs incurred by the insurer to issue the annuity and is amortized -LRB- or spread out -RRB- over the course of several years -- generally between 5 and 15 years . Deferred can also refer to the fact that annuity is not an immediate annuity , meaning it will not pay an immediate income stream , but rather can be left to accumulate interest to increase the value of the annuity .
This is a very interesting question because life insurance carriers allow for a lot of flexibility in beneficiary designations . For example , you have the primary beneficiary . This person -LRB- or entity , such as a corporation or trust -RRB- will get the money when the insured dies . What if I unfortunately the primary beneficiary is not alive -LRB- or in business -RRB- when the insured dies ? That is why you can designate a contingent beneficiary . This beneficiary will get the money in those exact circumstances - when the primary beneficiary is not available . What if you wanted to name multiple primary or contingent beneficiaries ? That can be done . Do they have to get equal shares ? No . As a matter of fact , especially when the contingent beneficiary is children , parents often do not apportion the benefit equally . What if you want to set up successor beneficiaries along bloodlines ? Such as your child , but if your child is not available , then your childs child ? This can also be done . Make sure you discuss this with your estate planning attorney . What if you want to make the beneficiaries minors ? Not a good idea . An insurance company will not release money to a minor . You will need to do some estate planning to secure that money .
The definition of contingent is `` dependent for existence on something not yet certain '' . In life insurance terms , it means that the contingent beneficiary exists just in case the primary beneficiary -LRB- or all the primary beneficiaries , if there are more than one -RRB- are not alive when the insured person dies . If the owner is someone different than the insured , one could set a contingent owner of the policy , as well . Life insurance is to protect survivors from the `` what if 's '' in life , and thus it is a good idea to name a contingent beneficiary for the same reason .
Contingent annuities do not make payments to the beneficiary until a specified event triggers the payment to begin . This condition is set up when the annuity is secured . E.g. . The payment of the annuity may be contingent upon the death of the annuity holder , or upon the beneficiary retiring or becoming disabled .
Contingent means conditional . In life insurance , you can choose a contingent beneficiary or owner for your policy on the condition that the primary beneficiary or owner dies . If no contingent beneficiary is named and the primary beneficiary or beneficiaries die , the insured 's estate usually becomes the policy 's automatic contingent beneficiary .
If the owner and insured are two different people and the owner predeceases the insured , the ownership of the life insurance policy would be given to the contingent policyowner , if one was named . If a contingent policyowner is not cited in the policy , then the policy would transfer to his/her 's estate and go through the probate process . So , in short , ownership would be determined by a judge . When you set up a policy with the owner and beneficiary as the same person , many people will cite the contingent beneficiary as the contingent owner in case they want to carry the policy forward . Keep in mind , if the policy goes through the probate process to determine ownership , someone must still continue to pay the premiums . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
What is a contingent for life insurance ? Contingent is a term applied to the seconary beneficiary . The contingent beneficiary comes into play on a life policy when the primary beneficiary has also passed prior to the death of the insured or decides to turn down the benefit offered to them .
Let me begin by saying that I do not sell annuities -LRB- I do not have my series six license -RRB- and I am not a licensed attorney . However , prior to becoming an agent I went to law school and clerked in an probate/estate firm for two years . Annuities can pass outside probate so long as you name a beneficiary -LRB- just like life insurance -RRB- . Typically , a spouse is named as the primary beneficiary and children as a contingent beneficiary . Many people currently use a Revocable Living Trust to avoid probate , and the trust can also be named as a contingent beneficiary . If no beneficiary is named , however , your annuity will have to pass through probate . And , depending upon its value the inventory fees could be quite expensive . I hope this helps answer your question .
What happens when both parents die ? Well it 's going to depend on how much time they spent in planning for such an occurrance . If they planned well , everything will go exactly has they have laid out in their insurance policies and will . If they did nothing and did n't name contingent beneficiaires then those funds go into the estate and are subject to probate . In the simplest ways , naming contingent beneficiaires allows for the funds to escape probate and go directly to the named individuals or entities . If the contingents were still minors the polcies might reference a will where the establishment of a trust happens and the funds go there to be distributed over time .
Life insurance policies can have a contingent beneficiary or contingent owner . This simply means that if something happens that the primary beneficiary or owner predeceases the insured then the policy proceeds or ownership transfers to the contingent -LRB- or secondary -RRB- owner or beneficiary . If both predecease the insured then any funds from the policy would go into the estate .
If there is a contingent owner named , the owner of the policy will become the contingent owner i -LRB- f the original owner of the policy dies -RRB- . If the insured person and policy owner are two different people , it is important to name a contingent owner so that the wishes of the policy owner are followed .
If the primary beneficiary dies before the policy owner dies , the contingent beneficiary would be the next in line for benefits . If the policy owner is well , he or she would simply call the insurance company and request a `` change of beneficiary '' form and rename a new primary beneficiary . If it is the contingent who becomes primary then the owner would rename a new contingent beneficiary .
A contingent owner on a life insurance policy is the person who would own the policy if the primary owner died . Contingent owners are only used when the primary owner is not also the insured person . The owner is the one who stipulate the beneficiary , method of payment , and all decisions regarding the policy . So if the primary owner would pass away , the contingent owner would make those decisions .
If there is a contingent owner named on the policy , the life insurance policy ownership would pass to the contingent owner . If there is not a contingent owner , the policy would pass through the estate of the person who owned the policy . If the estate was already closed by the time the family found the policy , they can contact the insurer for advice on how to proceed .
The beneficiaries of a life insurance policy pay in a certain order . First is the primary beneficiary which can be a person , a few people paid by percentage , or an institution , such as to repay a loan . Second is the contingent beneficiary . The contingent beneficiary is paid if the primary benefit dies before or with the insured . Third is the tertiary beneficiary . This beneficiary receives life insurance proceeds if all of the primary and contingent beneficiaries die before or with the insured . If the later beneficiaries are not named on the policy , then life insurance proceeds roll into the estate and will be subject to probate and estate taxes . This is always as shame as life insurance proceeds are usually not taxed if there is a named beneficiary . Be sure and work with a knowledgeable agent or advisor to be sure your life insurance policy is set up correctly .
If the primary beneficiary dies prior to the insured a few different things can happen . First , when the primary beneficiary dies , the next in line or contingent beneficiary would be next to pay . If a third or tertiary beneficiary was named , then they would be next in line for death benefit proceeds if both primary and contingent beneficiaries die prior to the insured . If there is no contingent beneficiaries listed after the primary and the insured dies , then the death proceeds would be left to the estate . This is not the ideal situation because it can cause the proceeds to be taxed with the estate that are normally tax free . It also ties up the death proceeds up in probate court instead of paying directly to the beneficiary tax free .
Of course ! You have the option to put on primary beneficiaries , contingent beneficiaries -LRB- in case the primary predeceases the insured -RRB- , and even tertiary beneficiaries if you 'd like -LRB- in case the primary and contingent beneficiaries predecease the insured -RRB- . Each level -LRB- primary , contingent , and tertiary -RRB- can have more than one beneficiary . You also want to make sure to designate what happens to a beneficiary 's share if he/she predeceases the insured -LRB- especially if there is more than 1 beneficiary - e.g. does it go to the other beneficiary ? to the estate ? to someone else ? etc. -RRB- The other thing you want to make sure of is that the policy structure does not violate the `` Goodman Triangle '' -LRB- named after a court case -RRB- . The Goodman Triangle , in short , states that 2 of the 3 parties of a life insurance contract must be the same to avoid certain tax consequences -LRB- same owner and beneficiary with a different insured or same owner and insured with a different beneficiary -RRB- . If you want to place more than one beneficiary on the policy , the owner and insured would have to be the same person to not violate the Goodman Triangle . When the Goodman Triangle is violated , the situation can result in the monies being subject to estate taxes or gift tax consequences . If a policy is owned by a trust such as an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , the insured and beneficiary will be the trust and the insured will be the person who 's life the trust was created for . The trust would illustrate all of the payout structure scenarios when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
In Canada , if the owner of the policy dies . what happens to the ownership of the policy depends on what the owner had put in place prior to his/her death . If the owner has named a contingent owner the the policy would transfer that way . If their was no contingent owner the the ownership would form part of the estate and be probated . Depending on who the policy ownership was transferred to there could be tax consequences . The cash value is what could be surrendered , the death benefit is not paid until the life insured 's death . NOTE , once the policy has been issued the life insured has no claim on the policy or its cash value , unless the owner gave them the access . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The annuity application has three possible persons involved : The policy owner , annuitant and beneficiary . The beneficiary can be more than one and can also select a contingent beneficiary if the primary beneficiary is no longer alive . The policy owner can also change the primary and/or the contingent policy beneficiary .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance If I Have Hypertension ?
Can you get life insurance if you have hypertension ? Possibly . It 's going to depend on your level of control and how long you 've been treated for Hypertension . With conditions like Hypertension the longer you 've had it is actually better , especially if you can show a good record of control with medication . An underwriter would be more leary of an applicant with just diagnosed hypertension . A track record of control on the other hand , can still get a person preferred rates with some companies .
Hypertension that is well controlled by medication can be rated as good as Preferred + with some life insurance companies . What is called well controlled varies by age ; you get a little more leeway if you are middle age or older . Some companies look at the highest reading in the past year ; some look at an average over the past years . If you have had one spike in the past year , or if you had a high average but the last 6 months have been much lower , you would be better off picking one company over the other . Uncontrolled blood pressure , hypertension in conjunction with other serious health conditions such as kidney disease or CHF , or blood pressures that requires 3 or more medications to keep it down , can cause a policy to be rated up or declined .
Can you get life insurance if you have hypertension ? Possibly . It 's going to depend on your level of control and how long you 've been treated for Hypertension . With conditions like Hypertension the longer you 've had it is actually better , especially if you can show a good record of control with medication . An underwriter would be more leary of an applicant with just diagnosed hypertension . A track record of control on the other hand , can still get a person preferred rates with some companies .
Yes , you can get life insurance with hypertension . If your life insurance is well controlled with one medication , you can be rated as good as Preferred or even the class higher than that , if your other health details and build fit that . If you are on more than two medications , if your hypertension has been uncontrolled recently , and/or if you have some other health conditions connected to your hypertension , you may be rated up or need to take a simplified issue policy . A good impaired risk life insurance agent can shop the best companies for your hypertension details , because different company rates differently .
That is an interesting question . I 've been an agent for many years , and I can speak from experience when I tell you that price is not based on color . I do not work with any companies -LRB- and I work with many -RRB- that would even consider breaking the law that way . That said , there are some things that come into play that might make you think -LRB- wrongly , I promise you -RRB- that It may cost more for African Americans . Life insurance costs are based in great part upon risk factors , including high blood pressure , diabetes , and obesity . These factors , along with heart disease are statistically common among all Americans , but much more so among African Americans . The American Heart Association in an article released last September suggests that a gene found in African Americans may be the cause for the highest rates of hypertension in the world . This disease is the leading cause of heart disease -LRB- # 1 killer of Americans -RRB- and strokes -LRB- # 4 killer -RRB- . Their article also outlines problems with obesity -LRB- 63 % of men , 77 % of women over 20 years old -RRB- among the community , as well as higher rates of diabetes -LRB- 2x as likely as whites to have it , among those 20 and older 15 % have the disease -RRB- . The US Dept. of Health and Human Services Office of Minority Health documents higher rates of cancers among the African American community in 2009 research , as well as higher mortality rates . Insurance companies are n't as concerned about the causes and reasons behind the statistics , as much as the heath issues of the applicants . If you are of any race , your rate will be higher if you suffer from diabetes or hypertension , especially if it has gone uncontrolled . The life expectancy of anyone with those issues is shortened , and so the companies bear more risk , and as a result charge more . The better the health , the cheaper the rates might be a simple way to put it , since the risk to the company determines the rate they will charge to insure you . If you smoke , expect to pay more . If you are overweight , expect to pay more . This will be true regardless of race , where you live , or the amount of coverage you apply for . I hope that this helps you understand how the industry works , and why it might seem like it is unfair . Thanks for asking !
Insurance companies look at hypertension in several ways . Some will ask if blood pressure readings have been above a certain number for the last few years or more . Some will ask the average of readings for the past one or more years . The number and type of medications is considered , and of course , the cause for the hypertension . Secondary hypertension caused by disease elsewhere in the body , CHF , etc are underwritten as a higher risk . To get the lowest priced life insurance policy with high blood pressure , contact a good impaired risk agency that knows how to shop multiple carriers to get your best rate .
Urine testing can give indications of kidney disease , but kidneys are involved in more than just renal disease . E.g. Protein in the urine can be a sign of uncontrolled diabetes . Urinalysis can evidence hypertension , or show that the applicant is not complying with treatment for hypertension -LRB- i.e. not taking their blood pressure medication as prescribed -RRB- . Urinalysis is also used to help determine whether the applicant uses tobacco or illegal drugs , or abuses drugs or alcohol .
Hypertension that is well controlled by medication can be rated as good as Preferred + with some life insurance companies . What is called well controlled varies by age ; you get a little more leeway if you are middle age or older . Some companies look at the highest reading in the past year ; some look at an average over the past years . If you have had one spike in the past year , or if you had a high average but the last 6 months have been much lower , you would be better off picking one company over the other . Uncontrolled blood pressure , hypertension in conjunction with other serious health conditions such as kidney disease or CHF , or blood pressures that requires 3 or more medications to keep it down , can cause a policy to be rated up or declined .
High blood pressure -LRB- hypertension -RRB- that is uncontrolled can cause a policy to be rated up or even declined , especially if it is in conjunction with another health condition such as diabetes or kidney disease . Some insurance companies look at your average blood pressure reading over a couple of years , while others will ask if you had any readings over a certain number in the past year or so . Some insurance companies will rate Preferred Plus just as long as all other health is in that range and blood pressure is well controlled . Some will only rate as good as Preferred or lower with use of blood pressure medication . The type and number of meds taken can also make a difference . By using an agency that carries a number of companies , you can find the one that rates you best based on your particular hypertension details .
Being rated for life insurance means that you had a table rating tacked onto your premium . Table ratings come in letters or numbers , with A to H , or 1 to 8 , being as high as they usually go , although it is possible to be rated up to table L or 12 with some medically underwritten companies and policies . Most commonly , each table rating will add 25 % to the Standard premium . Again , some companies use a different guideline for table ratings , and those differences can make a big difference in the price , with the savings -LRB- or extra cost -RRB- compounding as the table ratings get higher . Table ratings are just an assessment of risk and mortality , as are all health ratings given by life insurance underwriters . If approvals ended at Standard , many people would not be able to qualify for life insurance . Being able to get a rated policy enables many persons with MS , type 1 diabetes , Hepatitis C , and other health conditions to get a traditional life insurance policy of any type or amount . PS I just saw that there is additional information to this question . If your blood pressure or A1C run high , or if you have had complications from your diabetes or hypertension , it will not matter if you are only taking two pills per day . If , however , you have a history of good control with both , you may need to look at a different company to see if you can get a better rating .
If you have pretty good health -LRB- e.g. well controlled diabetes or hypertension -RRB- , are not morbidly obese , do not smoke , and are looking for a small final expense policy , you could get $ 15,000 of Whole Life for about $ 50 - $ 75/mo . This would not require taking an exam . If you are looking for Term Life Insurance , you may be able to get $ 100,000 of a short Term policy for about that same price . Throw in some health conditions , tobacco , overweight , longer term , etc , and the premium could be much higher . By shopping with an agency that carries lots of different options . you can get the policy that has the best price for you .
You can go to a website or talk to an agent who specializes in Final Expense Life Insurance to get Life Insurance for your parents . Many parents are not keen on taking an exam , and Final Expense policies usually have minimal underwriting requirements . They also allow for some of the common maladies of older age such as hypertension , type 2 diabetes , and arthritis . Finally , these type of policies are usually Whole Life and come in smaller face amounts , making them ideal for funeral related costs . If you are looking for larger policies for your parents , an exam will be required and some companies now ask cognitive questions of seniors applying for large face amounts . Ironically , the more extensive the underwriting requirements , the better the price for that policy may be . Again , seek a website or call an agent that offers Senior life insurance to be sure you are getting the best price , as prices vary widely for this age group .
Yes , having uncontrolled high blood pressure can affect life insurance . It can cause the premiums to go very high or even cause the policy to be declined . This is especially true if the hypertension is in tandem with other health conditions such as diabetes , sleep apnea , or renal disease . On the other hand , blood pressure that is well controlled with medication may only affect your rates slightly , or not at all . Using a broker with many options will help you get your best rate while having high blood pressure .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
As long as the hypertension is controlled and not excessively high or complicated by other factors which on their own could be reasons to make the proposed insured a substandard risk , high blood pressure should not prevent one from obtaining life insurance . If however the condition is not under control , it might not be possible to obtain an underwritten life insurance policy . Consult with an experienced life insurance professional who will be able to shop the market for the best fit .
Two of the most important things you can do to prepare for your life insurance exam are : 1 -RRB- do n't eat or drink anything but water for at least 8 hours before the exam , and 2 -RRB- do n't take the exam while you are sick . # 2 is especially important if you have diabetes , MS , Crohn 's , or any other health condition that flares up when you contract a cold or the flu . Even having recent surgery or intense pain can affect blood glucose or hypertension . So just try to schedule your exam when you feel well , if possible , and when you can avoid eating for 8-12 hours .
Generally speaking managed high blood pressure with no other outstanding impairments should be an obstacle to securing life insurance coverage . Prescription dosage , weight and other contributing factor my play a role in the final offer . Keep in mind that certain life insurance companies appear more benevolent to high blood pressure , hypertension , heart murmurs and other cardiac issues . So it pays to shop around .
The best time to buy Long Term Care Insurance is while you can still qualify for it , and while you can lock in the best rate . Around age 50-55 is a popular time because people start to experience hypertension and other signs of aging . As with most insurance , the best time is when it starts to gnaw at you . Even if you think it 's too late , it 's often best to follow your gut .
High blood pressure -LRB- hypertension -RRB- will not increase life insurance rates with some companies , as long as it is controlled . Most companies charge a little more if blood pressure medication is used , but some will give their best rating even with the use of one antihypertensive drug . If it takes two or more medications to control blood pressure , the rate will usually increase more . Some companies look at the average blood pressure reading over the past couple of years , some look at the highest blood pressure reading in the past year , and some use a combination of guidelines . Having stable and controlled blood pressure for over 6 months is the best way to get your best rate . However , there are simplified and guaranteed issue policies even for those with uncontrolled blood pressure .
Some companies ask whether your blood pressure exceed an average reading over the past years . Some ask if it ever went over a maximum reading during the past few years . If you have had problems keeping your hypertension under control , it is important to apply with the carrier that best phrases that question to your benefit .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Do Health Insurance Companies Make Money ?
Health insurance companies make money by charging more in premiums than the pay out in claims . The company has to project claims expenses 12 months into the future when setting premium rates . Most plans change premium rates only once per year . The Affordable Care Act requires that insurers spend 80 % to 85 % of premium dollars on direct medical care . If the ratio falls below that figure then the difference must be refunded to policyholders .
You know , there really is a right way to answer this question . I think the right way is to do whats best for you as the beneficiary . Life insurance is , after all , a care package from the insured to his loved one . It is a way of saying , I love you , and I take care of you now . Im going to make sure that an insurance company takes care of you later . This means that the golden rule is this : the quality of life you have now , is the quality of life you should have if you suffer the tragic loss of your spouse . If you are not making do with less now , you should not have to make do with less later . The money you need to pay your monthly bills now , is the amount of money you should have to pay your monthly bills later . The larger question is : for how long do you need this benefit to last ? For how long do you want to live off the insurance money ? There are a number of factors involved in that decision . First , and most important , is buying yourself the time needed to grieve and move on . Think about it . You have dedicated yourself to a life with someone . Now he is not there . And will not return . How long will it tell you to get back on your own two feet and renew your life ? Two years ? Five years ? Longer ? Then , what about your kids ? Theyve already lost one of their parents . Forever . They will need you more than ever . They will need you to spend as much time with them as possible . Can you afford to do this ? Life insurance can make sure the answer is yes .
Great question ! The very , very simplified answer is this - they make money in some ways like a bank does . The money you pay in premiums acts like the money you would deposit . The bank invests it , and makes money off of yours . Insurance companies do the same thing . Both charge fees for their services ; and will charge interest on money borrowed . Insurance companies can also make or lose money on the length of the lives of the policy holders - if you buy a policy , and pay on it for 3 years , and suddenly pass , the company will take a hit . But if you have a small policy , and pay on it for many , many years , they have plenty of time to invest and reinvest that money , and make a profit . I hope that helps , if you still have questions , contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies make profits much like banks do . They make money off of the products that they sell - all of the policies or annuities will have fees attached to them , that they can profit from . They also make money off the investments that they make while holding your money . They invest in things , just like we do . They can also make money by selling off or buying corporate assets , or divisions , much like corporations do . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
This is the $ 64,000 question , isnt it ? -LRB- And the answer , by the way , is not $ 64,000 of coverage ; nor should you have to pay $ 64,000 in premium . But some people do , and it is well worth it . -RRB- That is a very important consideration . Life insurance premium is money well spent . Each dollar of benefit literally cost pennies . If you get the best rate available , then it costs you a few pennies . If you qualify for a higher premium , that it costs you a few more pennies . In either case , it is an extremely economical way to make sure your heirs and beneficiaries get all the money they need , exactly when they need it . Having said that , I have a very simple philosophy when it comes to determining the face amount . When it comes to taking care of your family , be generous . Losing you will be an incomparable trauma for them . Financial stress and strain would really hurt them . Even having to reduce their standard of living somewhat will cause distress . Give them enough money to live well . It wont take you too much time to calculate just how much money would be needed to accomplish that . When it comes to leaving money to your favorite charity , be prudent . A life insurance benefit could represent a substantial donation to them . They need to have demonstrated a high measure of accountability and responsibility in managing their finances , to qualify for a great gift . Give them enough money to make a difference and take a few good strides towards fulfilling their purpose . And considering spreading your wealth around to various good causes . When it comes to taking care of your business obligations , be exact . Have your accountant crunch the numbers to make sure your partnership agreement is adequately funded . Determine the value of your key people and make sure your company is indemnified against their loss . Account for any and all debt , and make sure there is enough coverage to take care of it . Your business should be able to flourish without you . If you have built it correctly , new leadership should be in place , and the money should be there , for the show to go on . That is successful entrepreneurism .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
What is the best Whole Life Policy ? While there is no direct answer to this , the best answer is whatever policy will best protect your family . There are different types of whole life policies . The most common is ordinary whole life , also called `` straight Life '' or `` Permanent '' -LRB- cash value -RRB- Insurance . You pay a level premium for the rest of your life , as long as you are making your monthly premiums . The premium never increases and your policy accumulates cash value . How much life insurance -LRB- death benefit -RRB- will you need ? That determines on a number of factors such as : Do you have any children/grandchildren you want to leave money to ? How much of your income does your spouse depend on ? Who depends on you financially ? How much debt do you owe ? Do you want to leave money to your favorite charity ? You want to make sure you buy enough life insurance to cover your financial obligations if an unexpected or untimely death occurs . It is also important your premium fit 's within your budget . Because if you ca n't afford it , it is n't any good for you or your family . An insurance agent is the best person to get with to compare the different types of life insurance and find a policy that best suits your situation . I work with many top insurance carriers with the most competitive rates . I 'll do the shopping for you ! Thank you & Be Well , Mendy Douglas www.iflretirement.com/mendy-douglas/
The average life insurance agent makes around $ 40,000 per year . But selling life insurance is like owning your own business . There is no limit and there is no safety net at the bottom either . Most people who get into life insurance never make it past one year . A very few make a whole lot of money . How much one person makes has nothing to do with how much another person will make .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Life insurance companies make money the same way that car insurance companies make money ... from the premiums you pay . The most simple form of life insurance is term life insurance . If 100 people buy a 20 - year term life insurance policy , they will all pay premiums for 20-years -LRB- less if they cancel early -RRB- but only 1 of them will die during the 20-years . 99 of they will outlive the term . The life insurance companies price each policy based on the likeliness that you would die while the policy is covering you . You do n't have to worry too much about insurance companies . They know the numbers . They make money .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
You can make good money selling life insurance , or you can make no money selling life insurance . Those who are really good at it tend to attract more and more clients , and do exceptionally well . On the other hand , those who struggle tend to move on fairly quickly , because it can be a brutal industry if you are not doing well . Most people are paid by commission only , and expenses can easily eat up profits . When there is a split in commissions , the pie often seems too small . Most insurance sales people fall somewhere in the middle and make a decent living at selling life insurance . With some good breaks , they have years where they make good money . And if you like what you are doing , that can be a worthwhile career .
Sure . Financial institutions always set limits on the money they make available . For example , banks limit how much money they will lend you for a mortgage or business loan . Credit card companies limit the amount of credit they will extend you . Venture-capital firms limit the amount of money they will invest in your company . Life insurance companies generally look at your cash flow , debt , and net worth . Pretty basic stuff . Things get exciting when you have exceptional needs . For example , how much money insurance will they let you buy on a minor child ? Or an elder parent ? Or a former spouse ? Certainly , there are limits in all these situations . But the negotiations about the maximum available becomes interesting .
That is a great question ! The role of the adviser is supposed to be as a guide to helping you select the best funds for your desired goals in your portfolio . They are to work with you in selecting funds that are a fit for your goals in risk allowance , growth potential , and fee structures . They are supposed to be experts in identifying well performing funds , trends , and emerging investments . Many of them are very good , and have clients that are well prepared for retirement . There are many of them that are paid by their brokerage house for the specific funds they want sold , and for the commissions and profits earned for the brokerage . Their focus may not then be so much on your needs as it is theirs , and that 's been the industry rub . The high fees hidden in the fund structure has led to an increasing number of investors switching to indexed funds -LRB- like Vanguard -RRB- or moving away from the brokerage houses and purchasing their leading stock investments themselves , and eliminating the fees and middlemen . Nobody likes to see that the person who is supposed to be making you money is making more off you than you are making . If you choose to invest in a mutual fund that has an adviser , please be sure to meet with them face to face . Interview them before investing . Ask about how they are paid , what the fees are for the fund , and real life performance on the fund , not projections . Ask how often the stocks within the portfolio are exchanged -LRB- anything close to 100 % is risky for you - they make money for the brokerage on the exchanges , increasing fundholders ' expense -RRB- . Shop for your mutual fund very wisely , before investing a penny . For all the touted returns , according to a recent DALBAR report , the average equities investor has only realized a 4.4 % return -LRB- for a 20 year study concluded in 2007 -RRB- , under-performing the S&P by more than 7 % , and after inflation , returning only 1.44 % . Do your homework , and look carefully before investing , okay ? Please do as we do - if the interview leaves you with more questions than answers , if you had a bad feeling about it , or if you felt that the adviser was elusive in their answers , thank them for their time , and move on . Again , like in any business , some are good , some not so much ; but it 's your future and your money , not theirs , so treat it accordingly . Please feel free to contact me if you have any specific questions , okay ? Thank you for asking !
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How Good Is Genworth Long Term Care Insurance ?
There are not many long term care insurance companies -LRB- LTCi -RRB- left in the extended care market place . Perhaps there are a half a dozen worth your consideration . Genworth is one of the top LTCi companies in the U.S. . They generally rank well in annual premium cost against the competitors and offer excellent policy language in their contractual definitions .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
AARP no longer provides long-term care insurance . Genworth withdrew its `` affinity marketing agreement '' to accept applications for a special plan of LTCi designed for the AARP members , effective June 1 of this year . Genworth will continue serving policyowners that have previously purchased the Genworth AARP contract and will , of course , pay all legitimate claims . AARP reported that they are not looking for a new carrier to take Genworth 's place at this time , but would be acceptable to negotiating with any LTCi carrier that might come forward with a proposal . The largest and perhaps most vocal advocate for those over 50 in the US , and a major source of educational material on health-related issues for seniors , AARP said that they will continue to provide information about long-term care planning and the roll long-term care insurance might play in such planning .
Genworth life insurance is simply life insurance sold by Genworth Financial Inc. . Genworth carries a number of life insurance products -LRB- including Term Life , Universal Life and Indexed Universal Life -RRB- and other products -LRB- including Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities and Mortgage Insurance -RRB- . To obtain a Genworth Life Insurance quote visit one of the free quote engines on the internet .
There are less than a dozen good companies remaining in the long term care insurance market . And half of those are excellent long term care insurance companies . Genworth is among the best , especially with its latest policy rendition . And if it means anything , your humble responder -LRB- me -RRB- owes Genworth .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
There is a small inventory of long term care insurance companies left in the market place . While there are other companies these appear to be the real players in Long term care insurance : Mutual of Omaha , John Hancock , Med America , Trans america and Genworth . keep in mind that some long term care insurance riders are attached to life and annuity contracts as a supplement to elder care for seniors .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
The best long term care insurance company and its product must be determined by gender , age , smoking status , health history and current health condition . That being said , there are only a half dozen or so long term care insurance companies in the brokerage market . Genworth should be considered as a leader in the long term care insurance market .
There are few long term care insurance companies on the market , so its fairly easy to review the half dozen companies that occupy the long term care market . Here are some of the more recognized names in long term care insurance : Transamerica , Genworth , Mutual of Omaha , Med-America and John Hancock to name a few .
There are several long term care insurance companies of note : Genworth , John Hancock , Life Secure , Transamerica , Medamerica , Equitable and Aetna . The long term care market place is limited by a dozen companies after several companies withdrew from selling long term care .
Its always difficult to select one company , but heres my recommendation : The best long term care insurance company and its product must be determined by gender , age , smoking status , health history and current health condition . That being said , there are only a half dozen or so long term care insurance companies in the brokerage market . Genworth should be considered as a leader in the long term care insurance market .
To get a quote for Genworth Long Term Care Insurance you can visit a website that brokers long term care insurance for several companies . You will need to call , as the cost of any long term care insurance policy will depend on your age , health , and the features of the policy you choose . Talking to a knowledgeable agent can help you save money and get the features you really need .
There are a limited group of insurance companies left in the long term care market place . Premium prices vary between those carriers , but generally , they 're within a reasonable spread of each other . Contract definitions are the most important part of product due diligence with morbidity product lines like long term care . It 's important to seek out online experts who sell the top companies and can explain the policy provisions to your understanding . A leading long term care insurance company is Genworth .
It depends on gender , age , smoking status , health condition and whether you use two lives on one policy . A 60 year old male and female , both nonsmokers and in good health can secure an excellent long term care policy for both for $ 300 a month for a base policy . There are several excellent Long Term Care Insurance Companies in the extended care market . And singling out the best can be a difficult choice given the variables of gender , age smoking status and health condition as well as the premium price tag for the benefits purchased . But that being said the overall winner would be Genworth .
There are only about a half dozen long term companies left in the market place that offer traditional standalone polices on long term care insurance . Each company has policy provisions that are distinctive and can be somewhat tailored for certain groups . But with all that said , the overall long term care insurance company recommendation is Genworth .
Genworth Financial , Inc. is a Fortune 500with more than $ 100 billion in assets , domiciled out of Richmond Virginia and has a worldwide presence in 25 countries . Its first policy was written 1871 , under The Life Insurance Company of Virginia . Genworth is a major manufacture of life insurance , annuities and long term care insurance .
There are several long term care insurance companies that offer quality contracts for those seeking coverage for assisted living and nursing home care in their senior years during retirement . Each company has their areas of specialty based on the proposed insureds specific medical and personal information . Genworth is a leading long term care insurance company .
There are many companies that offer long term care hybrid products , but these are the main brokerage carriers in the U.S. : Genworth , John Hancock , MedAmerica , Mutual of Omaha and United of Omaha . Each one has a specific sub market , but overall Genworth appears to emerge as the leader of this list .
Genworth is a leading manufacturer and distributor of long term care insurance . Their long term care policies cover various options of elderly care from assisted living at home to nursing home confinement . The contract offers additional riders like the inflation rider that can mitigate rise in the cost of living .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Which Is The Best Life Insurance To Buy ?
There are many types of life insurance available in the market place today . There is annual renewable and guaranteed level term life insurance . Permanent life insurance has two actuarial policy platforms : participating whole life insurance and current assumption universal life . Universal life has three basic crediting methods : interest rate , index and separate equity/bond sub account performance . When considering the purchase of life insurance , you should explore life insurance spreadsheets from the brokerage community are an excellent starting place to explore the life insurance company that best suits your financial profile , risk tolerance and economic goals . The spreadsheets are divided into two macro categories : Term Life Insurance and Permanent Life Insurance .
The best and cheapest life insurance is the policy that is in force the day that you die . It is extremely rare that you would ever pay more for a policy than the death benefit . Regardless of its price the one that expires prior to your death hasnt any benefit and so its cost is quite high . The best life insurance to buy is one that will meet all of your obligations , fulfill all your dreams and provide a comfortable transition to those that you love when you pass away .
Which is the best life insurance to buy ? The answer depends entirely on your situation and need . If your need is short term , say 10 to 20 years , then term life may be the best choice to make . On the other hand if you 're looking to insure for a lifetime -LRB- 20 + -RRB- term is really a poor choice as the costs rise to a point where maintaining the policy becomes too difficult . Whole life is a better choice if that is your goal .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best time to buy life insurance is the day before you die . That way you wo n't pay a penny more than you have to for your coverage ! What 's that you say ? You do n't know the day you are going to die ? Hmmm ... well then , the answer is easy : The best time to buy life insurance is now . Assuming you have a need -LRB- or a desire -RRB- for life insurance coverage , you are best served buying it sooner rather than later . Term life insurance rates are as inexpensive as they will ever be , and they will only get more expensive as you grow older . If you are interested in cash value insurance , it 's even more important that you buy it sooner rather than later . Find yourself a qualified agent and work with him or her to design a program of life insurance coverage that will address your needs and keep your overall costs down .
Hello , In order to buy Life Insurance in New York State you must consult with an honest agent and fair agent that explains to you about the policy and how you benefit from the policy . There are different forms of Life Insurance which are Whole Life , Universal Life and Term Life . There are also some other types of Life insurance depending on your needs . The best way to buy is from a secure company with a high financial rating . Also look for lowest rates and other riders that can be added in order with alow rates . Other products from Life Insurance Companies will be Critical Illness Insurance which is Cancer , Stroke , Accident , andHeart Attack . It is always best to arrange an appointment with an agent in order to get more information on products and benefits and how they can benefit you and your family . Independent Agents as myself are known to offer a wider range of products and services and lower rates because we deal with a larger base of carriers , therefore , giving you the benefit of choosing the best product for you at the best , and lowest rates . As an Independent Agent , Iworkwith the bestcarriers with strong financial ratings and with a complete heritage that goes way back .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . The best overall time to buy will be your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare and just starting Part B coverage . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best life insurance to purchase is that which you can afford and which best meets your particular needs . If the premium is so high that you can not afford to pay it when the first car repair comes along , then that is not the best policy for you . If you are a healthy 70 year old buying 10 year Term life insurance to pay for your funeral , that is not the best policy for you . Visiting with a professional life insurance representative will help you find the best life insurance to purchase . Unfortunately , there is no other good answer , but the good news is that if you do n't like talking to insurance agents , you can do it by phone or email .
There are different schools of thought on how long you need life insurance . Some believe that you only need life insurance until you save up enough so that your dependents would do OK , even if your died prematurely . That philosophy is often called , `` buy Term , invest the rest . '' Those who like this idea tend to buy shorter terms and pay as little as possible for their life insurance , with the hopes that by the time their Term policy ends , they will not need to buy more . Some choose the age of retirement as their cutoff point for owning life insurance , with the intention of having all debts paid off and money for retirement saved up by then . On the opposite side of the fence are those who would use life insurance for a lot of their supplemental income and security in later life , and thus only buy permanent policies . Not only do they spend more on premiums than those who buy Term only , but they may even increase their premiums so that their policies are paid up by the time they retire . Many people fall somewhere in between . They buy what is most cost effective for each particular need . E.g. . They may buy Term for the bigger expenses in their lives , such as getting their kids raised . And they might buy a smaller Whole or Universal Life policy for their final expense needs . Then try to diversify their investments as is prudent at each stage of their lives , and in accordance with the economy , and products offered at that time .
The best age to buy life insurance is the age that you need it . Did you get just married or have a child ? Your family will most likely need to have some sort of financial protection if your life would tragically be cut short . Did you buy a house ? Life insurance could pay off your mortgage if you passed . Do you need some funds to be easily accessible to your family to pay for your funeral ? You can buy life insurance for that , even if you are over 70 years old . Prices are lower while you are younger , but not enough people recognize their need for life insurance until they are older . The good news is , there are policies available at almost any age . So rather than think your best time has passed , go ahead and purchase life insurance if you need it . When you need it , now is the best time .
When to buy permanent life insurance ? That is a good question . Some agents recommend buying permanent life insurance for every policy . Some financial consultants recommend never buying permanent life insurance . Both have some valid justifications , but both are rather extreme positions . In real life , with budget limitations , health risks , bear markets , and other considerations , it is hard for me to recommend only one option . Not everyone can afford all the life insurance they need in permanent coverage . Yet buying only term presents the risk of being unable to qualify for a new policy when the current one expires . Putting money in the stock market and savings plans should cover final expense needs , eliminating the need for permanent life insurance . But will those investments and savings be there when you die ? My recommendations are to buy Term insurance for temporary needs , and Permanent insurance for lifelong needs . Specifically , permanent insurance is best for final expense needs such as funeral , burial , paying off credit cards , and other costs associated with putting the deceased to rest . Permanent insurance is recommended if you want to use the policy proceeds to pay estate taxes , pass money to heirs , or bequeath money to a charity . If you use term insurance for any purpose that may find you `` outliving the term '' , you may find that you no longer qualify for a new policy , and that all your plans for your life insurance are moot .
Where is the best place to buy life insurance ? In Washington state it would be my office of course ! ;-RRB- Actually the best place to buy life insurance can vary . It could be online , on the phone or at an office . What you 're looking for is a agent who can answer your questions in such a way that you understand it . The agents role is not to speak to you in such a way that you are left scratching your head later over what was said . Big words , fancy charts do not make a good agent . A good agent translates the information you want into a way you understand , a poor one speaks over your head and bluffs their way through . I knew of an agent who used to produce a boiler plate document that was about two pounds of paper , of which two pages were actually about the client . The rest was fluff . He made a lot of sales that way because the clients were impressed by the volume presented , not the quality of information . The best place to buy is the place that actually answers your questions in a way that you understand and reduces the background noise as best as possible .
There are several different types of life insurance available . Term Insurance , Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are the main types . Term life insurance will be the least expensive but it also offers the least flexibility in many ways . Term is just that - a definitive length of time . If you buy 10 year term and you die 10 years and one week later , it pays your beneficiaries nothing . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime with little or no cash build-up inside the policy . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life can have significant cash build-up inside the policy which can be accessed through policy loans . This can be part of your strategy on paying for college , buying something major in your life or supplementing your retirement income . The cost of life insurance is determined by the amount of coverage desired , age , gender , medical history and the results of a paramedical exam . There is no cost to you for applying or for the paramedical exam - the insurance company covers those costs for you . By way of example , a non-smoking 25 year old female in excellent health , rated Preferred Best can get $ 250,000 of 20 year term for about $ 135 per year . I recommend you contact a knowledgeable , independent life insurance agent who can explain the different types of life insurance in more detail and help determine which is most appropriate for your needs . An independent agent will be able to let you pick from dozens of insurance companies available .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
Where to buy life insurance if purchased properly should be a guided purchase . Just to buy a policy usually winds up being a mistake in the future or at least when you run into an agent wanting to sell a policy then it becomes like the used car problem . Yours is wrong ! Persons who just buy life insurance in today 's life without any kind of knowledge or counseling is kind of following the idea that they know it all and need no knowledgeable assistance . The best solution to purchasing life insurance is to find a knowledgeable agent who can , through in depth research of your total financial needs , guide you and tell you the why 's of certain policies . There is no one policy that is better than all others for everyone . If you have an insurance agent that is really interested in you and your situation that individual will spend time with you without pushing for a quick sale . The real desire of that agent must be to be a mutually beneficial part of your life and the agent . The agent will educate you on the possibilities and the reason for different types of policies . Then , with your help , find something that will fit into your financial plan . You should have a total financial plan that you are working toward , consisting of a proper budget , proper life insurance , -LRB- and other insurance -RRB- , proper investments and investments that are balanced for long range safety and fit your own desires . Buying life insurance properly is far more complicated than buying a policy . Many just buy a policy and then blame someone else for the failure of that policy to do the job it was purchased for . Allen D. Mitchell , Ph.D. , CLU , FLMI Author , second edition `` The Prophets Dollar ''
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Home Insurance Claim Increase My Premium ?
A claim against your homeowners policy could affect subsequent premiums . You might be getting a discount for having been loss-free which would not be available next term . If the loss met certain prescribed levels it would make your home a substandard risk and the premium might be increased to reflect the increased risk . Actions taken on rates normally affect a policy for three years .
There are several factors that can increase premium in a homeowners insurance policy . One could be the cost of construction . Since the home must be insured with enough dwelling coverage to cover the home in a total loss you my see an increase in dwelling coverage thereby an increase in premium . Also age of the home can be a factor . In brand new homes most insurance carriers give big discounts for up to 10 years . As the home ages the discount diminishes until gone . Generally all other factors aside the home can remain in a stable position until the home becomes around 30 yrs old which can at that time start increasing premium do to the risk increasing . Another factor is just a rate change by the carrier mostly due to high losses in any given area . And of course your claims history is a factor .
-- > Normal 0 Whether anyone wants to admit it or not , insurance consumers tend to seek ways to reduce their insurance expenses while insurance providers are always looking for ways to increase their revenue . A rate increase is one alternative insurers might use to increase your premium but more often than not your premium frequently increases for other reasons . An insurer 's base rates are only one factor that goes into the calculation of your actual insurance premium . You should know what those factors are . The most common factor may be an increase in your amount of insurance . Your insurance company may claim construction costs in your area have increased and your amounts of insurance have been increased accordingly . That may be true but higher limits do n't always mean higher premiums . Discounts they may have applied in prior years may have changed or been discontinued . Penalties may have been applied if you had a claim or your credit score has changed . Rate categories may change as your home gets older . The reasons can be endless . But that doesnt mean you have to simply accept the increase . Question the reason for any increase . Determine if you are eligible for other discounts or credits . Consider other insurers who might offer you more favorable premium treatment . In my experience , insurers rates dont change all that often , and they can go up or down . Other factors used to calculate your final premium are usually the reason you see your premiums go up so often . Be proactive , a little effort and a few questions could save you a lot of money .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
There are several different reasons home insurance rates increase . Most carriers would probably tell you that at least a portion of their increases are linked to weather/natural disaster related claims increases over the past few years . I often hear from clients in Wisconsin -LRB- our location -RRB- thinking they should not have to pay more for insurance due to the carrier having more lossesfrom fires out west , or hurricanes on the coast.Clients say they did not have a claim so why should they pay more?This debate will rage on but I doubt much will change . Insurance carriers are a business and when they pay out more in claims , due to bad weather or what have you , they have to make up for the difference ; increasing premiums . They spread risk around to remain competetive , trying to balance out higher risk states/locationswith lower risk states/locations . Average premiums on a state to state level often reflect this -LRB- for example , Florida is often ranked number one for premium cost primarily due to the high risk of weather related claims -RRB- . Another common reason carriers provide for increasing prmeiumsis to keep pace with inflation , many policies offer inflation guard to keep pace with estimated values . What is the take away here ? Home insurance is WORTH IT ! Protect your home and investment , likely your most expensive one ! Talk to an independent agent today !
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
There are many companies out there and each one of them can treat a claim differently if you are asking will my rate go up . There are different types of claims that can trigger an automatic rate increase on renewal with most companies such as a water Claim -LRB- non flood -RRB- , a theft or a fire . Many companies do not increase premium if the claim is below a certain amount or threshold but you must check with your agent and carrier to be sure . Weather claims in many cases do not trigger increase in premiums but you must check with your agent and company . If you have a weather event and you are not sure if you have damage many roof and siding companies will come out and give you a free bid before you decide to call in the claim . Call your agent and discuss with them thescenarioand get advice so you can make a sound decision . Most companies do not have a problem with a homeowner with 1 claim in 3 years , but if you have more than that you could be considered a habitual claimant -LRB- even though the claims may not have been in your control -RRB- . Find an agent or agency that you can trust and do not be afraid to ask questions that come to mind . Do not find out if you have coverage for a claim after the fact and make sure your questions are answered . Keep in mind that the insurance you are purchasing is to help protect you from a financial loss so ask questions , try to get the best package and coverage that fits your family needs and then look at price .
There are many reasons why a home insurance policy would increase . Homes are insured for replacement of dwelling or in other words , what does it cost to build . If cost of construction and materials increases then replacement cost will increase which means your dwelling amount , or the amount to insure increases , which of course causes an increase in premium . Other factors could be regional rate adjustment do to losses . Also age of your home could be a factor . Claims you may have made could be a factor . Did you un-package your auto policy from your home could be a factor . There are many factors which should be discussed with your agent to determine premium changes and what if anything can be done to adjust the rate .
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
The key word in this question is `` cover '' . All life insurance can be used toward that purpose if the beneficiary chooses to use it that way . Policies can be made with a Funeral Home as the beneficiary but only one kind of policy will answer the question of `` will it cover '' . When I first entered the insurance profession in 1957 we sold a $ 1,000 or $ 2,000 ordinary -LRB- permanent , whole -RRB- life policy for a person wanting funeral expense coverage . As I increased my knowledge in the insurance industry I went to including a `` Final Expense '' amount in the practice of total planning of a persons insurance needs . At that time we figured $ 10,000 sufficient to meet the needs of final hospital expenses , taxes , burial , etc. . It was not until I was Executive Vice President of a company that was sold to a company that wrote burial insurance policies through the funeral home . I became licensed with the new company and learned , at a much older age , that there is only one policy that can REALLY say it will cover funeral costs at the persons death . That policy is available through funeral homes , it is an increasing whole life policy that the funeral home accepts for the purchase of a funeral at a specific time and then guarantees to give that equivalent funeral whenever the person dies without any further cost except some expense that might be beyond those spelled out in the contract . I began to teach classes for CE on this kind of policy for our state and for many insurance agencies . This is a completely different policy that can be of great benefit to a local independent agent working with a local funeral home . As I began to teach about this type of Life Insurance I found most Life Insurance agents had never heard of it or had been sold against it by companies writing supposed , last expense , death benefit policies . I have now written this type of policy for almost 20 years and the families of the deceased have nothing but praise for a properly planned REAL Funeral Policy . At 81 years old the death benefit of my funeral policy now exceeds the death benefit of the first policy I bought for total family protection . If I am blessed with a few more years it may equal what I used to think was a huge Life Insurance policy . I am still writing these policies on my friends . I have learned one thing over the years ! In the insurance business never close your mind to a type of policy until you have totally studied it yourself rather than being sold a bill of goods by a company that may not have the policy you are trying to learn about . Worry about that client , first and foremost , and do the best job you possibly can for that individual by increasing your knowledge of this business . I have covered some of the aspects of this policy in my recently published second edition of `` The Prophets Dollar '' , available on Amazon .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about your Home Insurance policy and what specifically may cause the premium to increase in your case . In general , there are a number of factors that can contribute to a premium increase . For example , it is likely that your policy has an `` inflation guard '' provision that increases the dwelling amount provided each year . If the dwelling amount on your home increased over last year , that would certainly account for a premium increase . If you suffered a covered loss and had to file a claim , that might affect your renewal premium . If your area was hit with heavy weather related losses , like the ice daming that the North East and specificlally CT was plagued by , even if yo were not affected , your company might have had to take a rate adjustment as a result of the losses . Your Insurance professional wil be able to review your coverage and advise you not only as to why the policy may have increased , but also ways to save .
There are many factors that affect the rates for homeowners insurance : Homeowner -LRB- insured -RRB- - The insured 's age , credit rating , loss experience , prior coveragewill affect the premium charged for a homeowners policy . Home location - Location is a very big deal . For example , a home located on the coast will be subject to a much higher premium compared to the same home located far inland due to the increased possibility of loss from wind or storm damage . Likewise , a home located in an area that has excellent fire protection -LRB- very close proximity to a fire station -RRB- will have a lower premium than the same home located in a secluded location very far away from fire protection . Home Construction - A stick-built wood frame home is more expensive to insure than the same valued home constructed of fire-resistive materials due to the increased potential for catastrophic fire loss with the former . Coverage Limits - Obviously a $ 500,000 home will cost more to insure than a similarly located/constructed $ 200,000 home .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
The thing to kssp in mind with regard to virtually any type of insurance is that the premium charged by the insuring company reflects the risk they are insuring . If your Homeowners ' premium has gone up and you have not filed a claim , more than likely it is because your policy , like most , has a form of `` inflation guard '' built in . That is , each year , the amonut of coverage on the dwelling itself will increase by a certain percentage -LRB- in CT usually about 4 % -RRB- . The increase in coverage will result in an increase in premium . If you have suffered a loss and filed a claim , it is also possible that you are being charged a loss cost or as a result of the claim , have lost a claim free discount that you previously enjoyed . Talk to your insurance professional about increasing your deductible and also about taking advantage of any discounts that are available .
The funding source of paying disability claims depends on who is backing up the promise to do so . 1 . Social Security DI is funded by tax-payers 2 . State-sponsored DI -LRB- if available -RRB- is usually funded by employers within that state . -LRB- A sole-proprietor that constitutes a company of one person may be able to `` opt in '' to the program with special enrollment . -RRB- 3 . Individual - or corporate-owned DI is funded by an insurance company that collects premiums from the individual or corporation to form a `` pool '' of money from which claims are paid . In any of these cases , the funding source must have sufficient funds in the pool to pay out legitimate claims as they are submitted . Premiums reflect the justified cost of maintaining that fund at the proper level . Therefore , claims may require a company to submit an application to the State Department of Insurance for increasing premiumsfora specified `` block of business '' within which claims will - or already have - exceeded premiums coming in for that block . -LRB- An individual can not be singled out for premium increases . -RRB- If one owns a policy that is `` non-cancelable '' , that term means that the carrier can not increase premiums for any reason over the life of the policy .
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Is Car Insurance Automatically Renewed ?
No , you renew it by paying the premium . The company does not have to renew your policy . If your claims history or driving record no longer meets their criteria you can be canceled , have your rates increased or be placed in the companies high risk plan if they have one .
This one is easy to answer : do nothing . Yes , thats right . Virtually all term policies these days are guaranteed renewable . This means that you will retain coverage without going through underwriting again . So when it renews , you will get a bill for the renewed rate . Or , if your policy is on automatic bank draft , the renewal rate will be deducted from your bank account . Next question : what will the renewal rate be ? The thing is , you wont know until the policy renews . You will note on the data page of your policy that guaranteed maximum renewal rates are illustrated . These numbers can be very scary because they represent worst-case scenario rate increases . The actual renewal rates are determined when the contract renews , not when it is issued . Fortunately , actual renewal rates typically dont come close to these guaranteed maximum numbers . But they can be high . Once the premium guarantee period is over , the policy can renew at a rate much larger than the original premium . If the insurance carrier needs cash , or wants to bolster its reserves , or for any other reason wants more money , renewal term premiums are a good way to get it Is this bad ? Is this good ? It all depends . If the insured unfortunately has cancer , or some other very serious high risk factor , then even that high rate might seem like a bargain . If you still need life insurance , and you cant qualify for a better deal elsewhere , then even if you pay much more money in premium , the death benefit can still be worth it . But if fortunately you are healthy and do not have high risk factors in your lifestyle , then you just might qualify for a better rate with another company . Go for it ! Just make sure you get prequalified so you know before applying that the change would be in your favor . And very important : dont drop your current policy until the new one is in force . You want to avoid a gap in coverage .
Against popular belief , there is no Grace Period for any type of insurance.The purpose of insurance is to transfer your risk to an insurance company willing to take your premium in return for undertaking your risk . Could you imagine not paying your premium for 10 days past the expiration date , and the insurance carrier covering the home in the event of a fire ? No matter what , it is best to make at least an installment payment prior to the expiration of the policy in order to assure your renewed protection ; having said this , some carriers offer automatic renewal which assures that a policy will be renewed to the following term . In the case of automatic renewals , a carrier is required to invoice the customer at least 45 days prior to the expiration of the policy ; in some rare cases , we have seen the due date of an invoice past the actual inception date of the new term . We would never advise relying on a policy without having paid premium for the said term.Mostinsurance carriers will accept a premium payment after the due date ; this varies by carrier . Some companies may accept payment up to 14 days following the expiration of a policy and perhaps return payments received past that date ; on the other hand , some carriers may accept a payment as late as 30 days after expirationaccompanied by a Statement of No Losses signed by the insured . As a customer , it is not advisable to assume that you are covered by your Home Insurance Contractwhen premium has not been received ; the carrier is not contractually bound to accept late payments . If you need toobtain a quote and buy home insurance online , we have a link providing self service assistancein multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
That means that the policy automatically renews each year without any underwriting . Typically all term products have the annual renewable option . The pricing is dependent upon which product you choose . If you select a 20 year term policy , the premium is the same for 20 years and then the policy will automatically renew at the premium required at the age you are after 20 years . If you have a life insurance illustration from your agent , you will see what the premium is every year even after the `` term '' has expired .
Yes . Most insurance policies will renew indefinitely upon the designated renewal period , unless something happens . Some examples of things that can happen that will cease the automatic renewal are : you cancel your policy ; you do n't pay your premium ; you make a lot of claims and your insurance company submits a letter of non-renewal ; you committed fraud and the insurance company cancels the policy . These are just a few of the reasons a policy might cease . However , absent some type of notice your policy will renew . I hope this helps .
Homeowners Insurance actually does not renew automatically . Every year as your insurance is coming up for renewal underwriters will look at the risk and make a decision if you the client are still a good risk or if they , the insurance company wants to get off the risk . Should the insurance company chose to keep you on as a client , then an offer of renewal is sent out . By you making the payment you are agreeing to continue the insurance policy at the terms offered .
Annual renewable term life insurance or ART as it is known by the life insurance industry allows a person to purchase the maximum face amount at the lowest premiums . These policies automatically renew without proof of insurability every year . However , these policies have an annual increase with age . The older a person becomes the steeper the increases become .
Medicare Part B is typically deducted from your social security check . Your Medicare Supplement premium is typically set up as an automatic payment between the insurance carrier and your checking account . You may still be able to mail in your payment but most carriers would prefer you to set up the automatic payment . There is an advantage for you in doing this . Medicare Supplement Plans are `` guaranteed renewable '' which means the only way the insurance carrier can cancel your plan is for non payment .
Not necessarily . That will depend on the many factors that go into determining you premium . Just because you have had to submit a claim does not mean that your insurance rate will automatically increase upon your next renewal . If you already have an accident or ticket on your motor vehicle record less than three years old then you will more than likely see an increase at renewal , but that is up to the carrier .
Term life insurance lasts as long as the term selected . When the number of the years are up , many policies either automatically become annually renewable , or you can choose to make them annually renewable . This extends the years of the policy , but at a very high price that can go up every year after that . Many Term policies offer conversion privileges , which allows you to change them to permanent insurance . The conversion period may be offered for few years , all the way to the end of the term . Converting your Term life insurance is a way of making it last for a lifetime .
Most carriers will send your auto insurance renewal notice forty-five to sixty days before your renewal and renewal is normally automatic with your current carrier if you are set up with an automatic payment program . If you feel that your rates are too high or you are not happy with your current carrier or agent , you do have the right to call other carriers to compare rates and possibly switch your coverage to them .
Term Life Insurance ends when you quit paying on it . If you forget a payment , if your address or bank account changes and premiums go unpaid , or if you purposefully stop paying on a Term policy , the insurance company will give you one month to make that payment up . After the one month grace period is over , you must prove your health qiualifies to have the policy reinstated . If the level part of a Term policy is over -LRB- e.g. you are entering year 11 of a 10 year Term policy -RRB- , the policy will either automatically renew at an extremely high price , or the company will send you a letter telling you the new higher price and you must choose if you want it to renew at that price . From then on , the premium can go up annually . Most people do quit paying their Term Life Insurance and let it end at that point . Whole or Universal Life can be `` paid up '' for life , in which case all the premiums have been made and the policy will not end -LRB- as long as it was properly set up , there are no unpaid loans , etc -RRB- . Otherwise , permanent insurance will end when the payer quits paying premiums and there is not enough cash value to pay them . `
All personal automobile policies offer some automatic coverage when purchasing a vehicle . This coverage varies from policy to policy and also varies from state to state . One thing that you should be aware of is the limitation on this coverage . All personal automobile policies specifically state that to have automatic coverage on newly acquired vehicles , all vehicles owned by you must be insured with the same company . Basically , if you have a policy with X company and another with Y company , this completely eliminates automatic coverage of a newly acquired vehicles . In this situation you would have to have an agent with the company desired to provide the coverage bind the coverage for you . It just would n't happen automatically .
Term life insurance is life insurance that will end after a certain length of time . Some Term Life Insurance policies will automatically renew at the end of the term at a much higher price than before , and can then go up in price every year . With other Term policies , you must elect to pay the new , higher premium when the level period ends . Either way , the time of level premium ends at the end of the term .
When you are talking term insurance youre talking about temporary insurance . Although there are a lot of companies that sell term insurance , all terms are not created equal . Somethings to consider are : 1 . How long do you need the coverage ? 2 . Does the policy automatically renew itself and if it does what are the new rates going to be ? 3 . If things change can I reduce my coverage to lower my premium ? 4 . Can the policy be converted to a permanent policy without new underwriting ? When shopping for term always deal with an insurance broker that represents multiple companies .
Being a life insurance agent is a form of owning your own business . There is no cap on your income and also no safety net for failure . A first year life insurance agent that works every day should usually net around $ 50,000 but many do n't make that . A few make way more than that . You get an automatic raise every day due to the snowball effect of renewals . It 's a great career for the right people . It 's misery for the wrong ones .
As a rule of thumb I always recommend you have as much coverage on a rental car as you would the cars you own . Typically , this is not an issue because most agents will automatically put you down for `` non-owned/hired '' autos on your personal policy . This is just an endorsement to your policy that will extend your liability and collision coverage to cars you are legally borrowing or renting . Make sure you check your policy for an endorsement like this . Other options : you can get rental insurance through the car rental agency or your credit card sometimes offers coverage for rental cars , just call the company and ask .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
STM -LRB- short term medical -RRB- insurance is real major medical insurance ... but with some limitations . STM plans do not cover any pre-existing conditions . The application process is simple , usually 5 yes/no questions or less . A `` yes '' answer is an automatic disqualifier . Most STM plans have a simple design of a deductible then coinsurance . A few have copays . Every one I have seen includes an Rx discount plan and some have PPO networks . Benefit periods are on a month to month basis with most plans issuing a maximum of 6 months although a few offer 12 month policies . When the benefit term expires so does your coverage . There is no renewal . Instead you apply for a new plan with new underwriting and new pre-existing limits .
Most of the competitive individual term life policies these days provide for a guaranteed level premium period of between 10-30 years . At the end of the level period , if the coverage does n't terminate automatically , the premium usually increases so significantly , most policyholders do n't renew it . The coverage should be converted to a permanent policy before that time -LRB- while in the conversion period -RRB- or , if you are still insurable , work with a life insurance professional to find a new policy . Keep in mind that term eventually is not available due to age or insurability reasons . Buy permanent coverage as soon as possible to prevent your coverage terminating before you do .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Should I Drop Life Insurance ?
It ultimately depends on your personal situation , but there will always be a need to have life insurance coverage -LRB- such as income replacement for your spouse , burial expenses , fees for the handling of your estate , leaving a legacy to your loved ones , etc. - using life insurance to provide income for your spouse after you die is a major need for coverage that is often overlooked -RRB- . You may simply need to change the amount of total coverage you have in force as your needs change , but you will most likely need to have some level of coverage in force forever . The most common type of life insurance that gets dropped is term insurance . The reason usually being that the term period on the policy is expiring/has expired and the premiums start increasing . When this happens , people usually buy a new policy to replace the old term policy to save money on their premiums . If you 're unsure about what to do for your specific circumstances , speak with an experienced broker who can help you determine the best course of action for your specific needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for further assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Many life insurance policies expire . If you have a policy that you must drop then the proper time to do that is when you no longer love anyone . Or when you no longer owe anyone money . Or when you no longer want to make a difference in this world . You certainly do not want to drop a policy if your health is declining , or when there are still loose ends in your estate .
That is a great question ! The answer really depends upon why you would want to . There are policies that end on their own , and to renew them becomes really expensive really quickly , and if that is the case for you , let your term policy expire , and do n't renew it . If your case is that you 've found a cheaper whole life policy , drop the old policy as soon as the new policy becomes effective . If it 's a matter of affordability , maybe a better solution is to call and have your coverage reduced -LRB- lowering your premium payment -RRB- and allowing you to keep the policy . If you are needing money , maybe taking out a loan on the policy is wiser . If I can help you further , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
The easy answer to drop your term life insurance is when you goal for that plan is met . For example , if you purchased the plan to cover a 30 year mortgage and paid it off early and have no further need for the protection you should drop it . If the term is met and the rates increased drastically you may want to drop it and apply for another policy if your health is still good . Another scenario may be retirement and the nest egg is fully funded with no unforeseen circumstances , it could be time to drop it or convert it to permanent life insurance or paid up life insurance if the need for a death benefit still exists .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
Great question ! There would be a couple of immediate results . The first is that you would no longer have the benefit of insurance to help pay for costs should you become sick or injured . Those costs can be devastating to your financial stability . The second is that under the Affordable Care Act , there are penalties for not having insurance , that are leveled when you file your taxes for this year . The health insurance companies limit the ability to enroll in their programs , and many workplace plans will not drop you until the open enrollment period unless you meet specified conditions.Without knowing the reason that you are considering dropping your coverage , I would ask that you would have a plan in place before you actually do drop your coverage . If I can provide more information , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! Two of the best reasons to buy Life Insurance at an early age is to first lock in a low price , and second insure against any health issues you might have as you grow older . No reputable company will drop you for developing health issues , and that should be clearly stated in your policy . If you 've made your payments on time , you should have nothing at all to worry about . The only legal way that a company could drop you is if there was reason to doubt the truthfulness of your answers on the application when it was submitted , and your policy is less than two years old . Other than that , you should have no problem keeping your policy . Thanks for asking !
Can a spouse drop the other spouse from thier health plan ? Usually no without your permission . Unfortunately , this happens in cases of divorce or just prior to . A good HR person will get the request in writing where it should state that if the spouse is being dropped from coverage , their signature should also be on the form when turned in .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
Many life insurance policies expire . If you have a policy that you must drop then the proper time to do that is when you no longer love anyone . Or when you no longer owe anyone money . Or when you no longer want to make a difference in this world . You certainly do not want to drop a policy if your health is declining , or when there are still loose ends in your estate .
Can you drop your husband from your health insurance ? Well the answer may vary by state . You may be able to drop your husband , but he will have to agree in writing for it to be done . The reason for this is when a couple divorces a spouse sometimes drops the others coverage without their knowledge . Sort of like emptying the bank account .
The simple answer is : you should pay an amount that you can afford . People who buy life insurance with the last dollar in their monthly budget will end up dropping their policy when emergencies arise . Life insurance that is dropped is of no value at all . Setting aside an affordable amount to pay life insurance premiums will help ensure that your policy is active when needed . Also , many people feel that if they ca n't buy a large amount of life insurance , they will buy none at all . Who among us would not welcome an extra $ 10,000 of cash at the traumatic time of losing a loved one and trying to take time off work , arrange for a funeral , house relatives or travel to the location of the funeral ? It does not take a million dollar policy to show love for those who are left behind . Of course , premiums differ for different types of policies and different types of risk . If you are using your life insurance to provide income during retirement , it will take a much larger portion of your budget than if you are just funding your funeral . Also , life insurance for those who are older or of poorer health will cost more than life insurance for young , healthy persons . But there is also a greater chance of the death benefit being paid out sooner when the insured person is older or suffers from poor health . A licensed agent can help you look at your whole financial picture and pick out a policy that will meet your needs at an affordable cost .
You employer may drop your health insurance . However , there are many underwater stones involved with this executive decision . For example , the employer can not drop the coverage for you only , except when you , for example moved from Full Time to Part Time and in order to be eligible for benefits you must work full time . Or may be you were moved from employee status to 1099 ? If you 've learned that your employer dropped your health insurance , but other employees of the company still receive this benefit - contact a lawyer . This could be a basis for a lawsuit against your employer .
Let me count the ways 1 . When you want to be sure your benefit will be paid out . People tend to keep permanent insurance and drop term . If you drop the policy , no one will collect the money you paid for ! 2 . When you want a premium guarantee for life . Term will , as you know , guarantee the premium for a fixed period only . 3 . When you want cash accumulation at a guaranteed interest rate that is typically higher than any other guarantee-oriented product . What other product is a better fit for the conservative portion of your financial portfolio ?
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Why Are Insurance Companies Dropping Long Term Care Insurance ?
Insurance Carriers have experienced higher claims and losses , due to increased longevity , chronic illness survival rates and cost of care . As a result , 12 of the top 20 carriers have dropped out of the market in the past 4-5 years . In addition , all carriers have had huge rate increases and/or offered clients a cash buy-out option to cancel older policies . Newer policies have been re-designed and re-priced to account for increased LTC expenses . In most cases , I recommend Living Benefit Life that will accelerate up to 100 % of the face value -LRB- depending upon severity of illness -RRB- , in case of : Critical Illness -LRB- Cancer , Heart Attack , Stroke , Major Organ Transplant , etc. -RRB- ; Chronic Illness ; Disability ; Terminal Illness ; or Death . This allows the client to have one policy with guaranteed level premiums that can provide access to funds while they are alive or in case of death .
That is an excellent question ! What happened was that when these policies were first rolled out , the costs of long term care and the average lifespan were still reasonable for insurers to issue coverage for . As time passed , however , the skyrocketing costs of long term care , coupled with longer lifespans created a situation where the insurers were more and more often taking losses on the policies . So they either retooled them , pushing the enrollment age up , lowering benefits , and raising the premiums , or they dropped the policies altogether . There are still some companies out there that offer them , but with the change in the law in 2010 , more people are using their annuity payouts or 401k payouts to cover those long term care costs tax free . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Some of the items and services that Medicare does n't cover include : < a title = '' Services that include medical and non-medical care provided to people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living , like dressing or bathing . Long-term supports and services can be provided at home , in the community , in assisted living , or in nursing homes . Individuals may need long-term supports and services at any age . Medicare and most health insurance plans do n't pay for long-term care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > Long-term care -LRB- also called < a title = '' Non-skilled personal care , like help with activities of daily living like bathing , dressing , eating , getting in or out of a bed or chair , moving around , and using the bathroom . It may also include the kind of health-related care that most people do themselves , like using eye drops . In most cases , Medicare does n't pay for custodial care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > custodial care -RRB- Most dental care Eye examinations related to prescribing glasses Dentures Cosmetic surgery Acupuncture Hearing aids and exams for fitting them Routine foot care You can go to the medicare.gov website and check on the main page if any test , item or service is covered by Medicare .
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
Long Term Care Insurance is offered by many companies , although a number of carriers have dropped it in recent years . To name just a few would be unfair , and it would be impossible to list them all without overlooking some . To start , try talking to a licensed Life insurance agent who is certified in Long Term Care . He/she can guide you through the Long Term Care policies from several companies , as well as explain some Life insurance policies that offer riders or living benefits to cover long term care type needs .
Many people worry that their life insurance policies will drop them if they develop a health condition , as can happen with health insurance . The fact is , if you filled out your life insurance application honestly , complied with whatever they asked you to do , and got a policy , that policy is yours to keep . You can have a heart attack the next month and it will pay the death benefit . You can start smoking the next year and it will pay the death benefit . You can not be dropped over something you did not know ahead of time . Given that type of guarantee , why not lock your life insurance policy in for as long as you can . If you can get coverage for 30 years or a lifetime instead of 10 , have a need for longer coverage , and can afford it , no one can take it away from you as long you keep paying the premiums .
My advice is to keep your Term policy until the time when premiums go up -LRB- usually , at the end of the term -RRB- . The exception would be if your health improved , you lost a lot of weight , quit smoking , or something else that would allow you to get a better rate on a new policy . Once the rate jumps up and goes into annually renewable term , the price gets so high that it is unsustainable for long . Some situations that might prompt you to keep it for a while is if you are terminally ill or have a very short need for which buying a new policy would be more of a hassle than it is worth . It is far better to convert the policy before the price jumps up and the conversion privilege ends . You will get a lot more for your money to convert it to permanent than pay the annually renewable rates . As far as dropping your Term policy when the need ends , one need usually replaces another , and when that good rate is gone , it is gone . You will be surprised at how much more it will cost you to get that coverage back just due to being older . If you have been diagnosed with a serious health problem in the meantime -LRB- and is n't that why a lot of people seek life insurance , because they have just been faced with their own mortality -RRB- , you may not be able to get a new Term policy at all . So I would give it a lot of thought before dropping any Term policy unless it is to get a better policy at a lower rate , or to switch it to something permanent .
You can drop life insurance whenever you like . However , in many cases , the life insurance becomes more valuable the longer you have it . E.g. . If you purchase a 30 year term policy , the premium is averaged out over the 30 years . While you are younger , you are paying more than the actual cost of insurance for someone your age -LRB- that is why shorter term insurance costs less -RRB- . But once you get toward the end of the term , you are usually paying much less than the normal cost per thousand at your age . Unless you no longer need life insurance , or if the premiums have started to go up to an unreasonable amount , or if you had an improvement in health or weight or smoking status that will help you get a better rate with a new policy , consult your agent to be sure you are doing the right thing in dropping your policy .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Under no circumstances can they term you without a reason . The reasons are also limited as to why the can term you . They can not kick you off the plan due to health conditions you acquired while you had the plan . When you hear rumors of people getting kicked off their plan because they became sick , they are just that , rumors . Failure to pay premium , plan discontinuation , employer dropping the plan , moving out of the plans service area are the main reasons a person would lose their coverage . They can not cancel insurance because someone has been incurring a high number of claims . I would suggest there must be some type of error with your cancellation . You should call the insurance company and ask them why they have termed you . They will have an answer whether it is legit or not is a different story but if they have termed you due to some error , you will be able to get reinstated .
Short term life insurance is generally thought of as term life insurance that comes in terms of 1 , 5 or 10 years . One year Term , or Annually Renewable Term , can be helpful for someone in between jobs or some other need for very short term coverage . However , one year Term will go up in price each year , and sometimes you need to re-qualify every year . So locking in a longer term is much easier and more cost effective if you need more than a couple years of coverage . Five year Term is hard to find , and thus the prices are not as competitive as one would think . I have found that ten year Term rates often run as low or lower than five year Term . Since there is no penalty to drop Term life insurance , you may as well take the longer term and then just drop it if you do n't need it the whole ten years . Ten year Term policies are common and competitively priced . Again , if you need longer coverage , it can cost less to lock the rate in longer while you are younger and your health is good . But if you are going for short term coverage , 10 or 15 year Term can be a good way to go .
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Keep My Car Without Insurance ?
You can keep your car without insurance . However , you can not drive it , which takes a lot of the fun away from owing a vehicle ! If you do not plan on insuring it , take the licence plates off the vehicle , and either store the car away or keep it so it is very secure . You would not want any small children -LRB- or animals -RRB- wanderingaroundand entering it .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
I am assuming this question relates to whether or not a policyholder can deduct their auto insurance premiums on their Federal or state income taxes . Unless the car is used for business purposes , the answer is `` no '' . However , if you use your car for business purposes , and your employer does not reimburse you for the business use of your car , there is a way to deduct a portion of your auto insurance premium . The IRS allows two ways to deduct expenses for the non-reimbursed use of your personal car . The first method is the mileage method . The IRS sets a mileage allowance every year , and that allowance is meant to cover fuel , wear and tear , maintenance , insurance , and other expenses . The second method is to keep track of all of the expenses related to your car , and then pro-rate those expenses by the amount of business use of your car . My employer reimburses me for the business use of my car using the mileage method . I do n't know if it 's worth the trouble to keep detailed records of your car expenses to make the second method worthwhile .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' renters insurance for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as renters , home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that offers the `` best '' or `` most affordable '' renters insurance for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners , renters , or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I live in Georgia also and have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that is `` best '' or `` average '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Disability Insurance For Pregnancy ?
The type of Disability Insurance that covers normal pregnancy is Short Term Disability , or `` Sick Leave '' . Long Term Disability will cover complications experienced while pregnant or as a results of childbirth or recovery from childbirth . But Long Term Disability will not cover time off due to a normal pregnancy .
This is a very common question and the answer is that it depends on the carrier and its definition of total disability . Normal pregnancy is not considered a disability by some carriers . In fact , it is clearly excluded from coverage in the contract . For others , as long as it falls into their definition of what constitutes a total disability , they will replace income after the elimination period is satisfied . The definition of disability is key . A typical definitionmight be something like `` the inability to perform the usual and customary duties of the occupation -LRB- job -RRB- in which the insured is working at the beginning of a disabling event ... '' A less favorable definition would add the words , `` and is unable to work in any other occupation . '' Since many women are able to performthe primary duties of their occupation during the first two trimesters of a normal pregnancy , some carriers do not automatically consider a leave for pregnancy a trigger point to replace income . And , if they do , 90 days is a typical elimination period - a kind of `` time deductible '' before one qualifies for benefits - most women would probably not satisfy the elimination period before the baby was born anyway . If there were complications resulting from pregnancy , then that 's a whole different situation , and if they started to occur early enough in the pregnancy and did qualify under the definition of disability , the elimination period would theoretically start sooner and benefits might be paid out before birth . If you are beginning a new job and think you might become pregnant or intend to become pregnant during the time you are employed with that company , be sure to ask Human Resources if the company provides disability insurance as a group benefit and if the coverage includes normal pregnancy .
It depends on the carrier . Some carriers do not treat normal pregnancy as a sickness that keeps a woman from working and do not replace income during a normal pregnancy . However , to fully answer the question , request a `` specimen policy '' from the carrier you may beconsidering to find out the exact contract language aboutthe replacement of incomeduring pregnancy . Here is a typical treatment of normal pregnancy from a highly-reputable carrier for DI : `` If the Elimination Period for Your Disability Benefit is less than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are not covered Sicknesses . However , if the Elimination Period is equal to or greater than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are covered Sicknesses subject to the definition of Disability . '' Now , one has to refer to this carrier 's specific definition of disability in the specimen policy : `` During the Your Occupation Period * you are not able to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material acts necessary to perform your occupation in the usual and customary way and you choose not to work at any occupation . After the Your Occupation Period You are not able to engage with reasonable continuity in any occupation in which you could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of your age , education , training , experience , station in life , and physical and mental capacity . '' * Insurance-speak for the occupation you are in when you become disabled ; you pick the period of this part of the definition of disability when you apply , typically 2 years up to age-67 . The longer the your occupation period , the higher the premium . Thats because the risk to the company is higher to replace income for a longer period of time due to the fact that the choice to work in another position or not during this period is yours . The key to the question is : does your condition of pregnancy restrict you from working ? The insurance carrier will want to know that from your doctor before they will start the clock on the elimination period -LRB- 90 days -RRB- , after the fulfillment of which you will start to get income replacement checks . If you add a `` partial disability rider ' , usually at extra cost , you might not have to be `` totally '' unable to work in your occupation to get a pro-rated replacement of income as you work part-time . Again , refer to the specimen policy .
It really depends on the type of short term disability plan that you have . Most I have seen will not cover a normal pregnancy but will a complicated pregnancy . Some disability insurance will not cover any type of pregnancy without a medical diagnosis of a complication caused by the pregnancy other than the pregnancy itself . If you can locate your policy , read the exclusions and limitations page to find out what it specifically covers in regards to pregnancy .
Short Term Disability Insurance covers time taken off for a normal pregnancy and childbirth . No Disability Insurance would cover taking off the entire pregnancy for a normal pregnancy . Long Term Disability Insurance is the type of DI that covers long term absence due to complications of pregnancy and childbirth .
Of course you can . Just do n't look to the disability policy to help finance time off work or issues from the pregnancy . Insurance companies have this nasty little `` pre-existing conditions '' clause with disability insurance . A disability policy will help with other problems down the road but wo n't help with the pregnancy . However , the pregnancy itself does not stop your ability to purchase a disability policy .
Unfortunately , it is not possible to purchase disability insurance that will cover your pregnancy , after you are pregnant , in Rhode Island or other states . The pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition . If you are buying the disability insurance with the idea of excluding pregnancy related extended absences , it may be possible that some disability policies would cover you with an exclusion .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
Normally , pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition and not covered by a disability insurance policy . It is up to the company whether they would postpone taking the application or exclude that pregnancy from coverage . Once the baby is born , you can apply for disability insurance prior to becoming pregnant again , to obtain coverage for that pregnancy .
The type of Disability Insurance that covers normal pregnancy is Short Term Disability , or `` Sick Leave '' . Long Term Disability will cover complications experienced while pregnant or as a results of childbirth or recovery from childbirth . But Long Term Disability will not cover time off due to a normal pregnancy .
To get Disability Insurance to cover normal pregnancy , you need Short Term Disability . Most people get this type of policy paid for through their work , or are offered a group short term policy that they can pay for on their own . If purchasing an individual short term disability policy , you must apply for it before you are pregnant . Long term disability insurance will cover pregnancy that involves complications .
Every insurance carrier will ask medical questions when completing an application.Some carriers will decline applications for pregnant women.Many willnot ask any pregnancy related questions , so you may be able to purchase a policy while pregnant in many cases . Every policy will exclude coverage for any preexisting medical condition . That exclusion may last 6 to 12 months . That means your existing pregnancy will not be covered , but accidents and illnesses unrelated to your pregnancy may be covered . Policies covering normal childbirth are difficult to find . They are only offered through employers . If you have the opportunity to buy a policy it may be your only chance to get covered for future pregnancies .
Yes , short term disability insurance does cover maternity leave if purchased at the right time -LRB- meaning , before you become pregnant -RRB- and with a policy that states that it has that benefit . Unlike long term disability insurance , which only covers complications of pregnancy , short term disability insurance covers time off related to normal pregnancy and childbirth .
I have never seen any exclusion for pregnancy . Most people on Medicare are beyond child bearing years . If a person who is younger and receiving Medicare because of disability gets pregnant the pregnancy would most likely be covered the same as any illness . Under the new PPACA law pregnancy is required to be covered for all female applicants of health insurance .
Can I get disability insurance when pregnant ? Well possibly , but you wo n't like that they would exclude covering time off for the pregnancy as it is a pre-existing condition . Depending on your health at the time , and where you are at in the pregnancy , you could be covered , but not for the pregnancy .
You can purchase a short term disability policy while pregnant . Many carriers will not ask pregnancy related questions on the application , although some do . The policy may cover any accidents or illnesses not caused by a preexisting condition after one year . Future pregnancies will be covered , however no policy will cover your current pregnancy .
Can you get disability insurance while pregnant ? Yes , you can . Will they cover the pregnancy and any complications with ? NOPE . Disability policies carry a pre-existing condition clause that allows them to turn down a claim for a condition that occurs prior to the application . So you could get a disability policy while pregnant , but everything connected to the pregnancy would not be covered .
Since disability insurance pays for time off for pregnancy and childbirth , being pregnant is considered a pre-existing condition and you can not usually apply for disability insurance while pregnant . In my experience , the application is postponed until after the baby is born , but you might be able to modify the policy to exclude pregnancy related disability so that you can go forward with the application .
It 's going to depend on what trimester of pregnancy the person is in . Usually the first two trimesters it is not a problem as long as there is a good record of prenatal care and things are considered to be a `` normal '' pregnancy . The third trimester can be a bit dicey as the closer the potential insured gets to delivery , the more a insurance carrier will want to wait . Your chances are pretty good if you are maintaing good health during the pregnancy and under a doctor 's care . Expect underwriting to go a bit longer than usual as doctor 's records will be asked for . Just do n't put it off till the third trimester if it is something you need to do .
You can get disability insurance , however it will NOT cover time away from work due to the pregnancy , unless you geta medical professional to sign off on a complication of such a nature as to merit time off . Regular pregnancy = potential chance at maternity leave should your employer offer it , but it does not automatically set you up to collect disability insurance checks .
end question
start question
annuities
What Kind Of Annuities Are Out There ?
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
That is a GREAT question ! The `` twin '' question to `` how much is right '' , is : `` Which KIND is right '' . There are more than 10 types of Life Insurance : at least 3 kinds of `` Term '' insurance , and at least 10 kinds of `` Permanent '' insurance . Which kind is right for you depends on your goals and needs . That would include your family situation , your financial situation , and what and who you want to benefit . Then when all that is determined the amount of benefit can be determined . A kind of `` rule of thumb '' - taken completely out of context with all the other variables is about 8 to 10 years worth of your annual income . But in reality each situation is unique to the individual client . That 's why personally I take an Education and Fact Finding approach to advising my clients on which kind and how much insurance to implement .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Generally , when you buy an annuity you 're going to keep it for the life of the contract . Annuities can be cancelled early , but you will likely have surrender charges and certain tax implications involved if you do . What kind of annuity you have may have different penalties for surrendering the annuity early . If you surrender the annuity before 591/2 , I believe you can face a 10 % federal tax penalty on the value of the annuity . You should definitely talk it over with your annuity agent before making any decisions so you know what may happen if you surrender the annuity early . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Generally , when you buy an annuity you 're going to keep it for the life of the contract . Annuities can be cancelled early , but you will likely have surrender charges and certain tax implications involved if you do . What kind of annuity you have may have different penalties for surrendering the annuity early . If you surrender the annuity before 591/2 , I believe you may/can face a 10 % federal tax penalty on the value of the annuity . You should definitely talk it over with your annuity agent before making any decisions so you know what may happen if you surrender the annuity early . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A deferred Annuity means your Taxes are not payed until you start taking money out of the account , tax-deferral . All Annuities have this tax deferral so it does not matter what kind of Annuity you get . An annuity is a contract between you and an insurance company . The annuity will credit money to your account according to the method which comes with the Annuity . There is so much more you need to know about annuities before you get one so please follow up with your Broker or contact me if you do not have one .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
The advantages of having life insurance is knowing that your financial obligations will be taken care of and not a burden on your survivor . The disadvantage of life insurance is that for the vast majority the insureds do not match their Survivor 's need for cash upon their death with the ` Right Kind ' of insurance plan . Consider for example : a married insured whose Spouse relies upon their income to sustain the expenses of daily living . What is the ` Right Kind ' of Life Insurance plan and what is the ` Right Amount ' of death benefit ? Term Insurance 's disadvantage is the fact that very few deaths occur in the coverage period . Their need for income remains unprotected . Permanent plan 's disadvantage is the fact that only the wealthy can afford the face amounts required to support a Survivor 's need for lifetime income . Reversionary Annuity by design is the ` Right Kind ' of life insurance plan when Survivor Income is the need . It is much more affordable than Permanent plans and 100 % of the Surviving spouses will receive its benefit .
That is an interesting question . I assume you ask because someone presented the idea to you . Annuities are a kind of insurance product and are sold / issued by life insurance companies . Annuities are either `` life certain '' or `` period certain '' . If it is ` life certain ' the annuity will pay out a specified amount per payment period for as long as the annuitant lives . If it is ` period certain ' it will pay out for the length of the determined period regardless if the annuitant lives longer or dies before the period ends . If the annuitant dies before the period ends their beneficiary will receive the balance of the payments . Another idea that could be expressed as a life insurance annuity is when the death benefit of a life insurance policy is set up to be annuitised to the beneficiary . That is the death benefit would be used to purchase an annuity for the beneficiary .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question : Is a deferred income annuity a good idea ? Well , a lot of people like to buy and shop for blocks of income . You can actually go out and figure out what kind of income you 're going to need to subsidize your basic domestic expenses during retirement . A deferred income annuity will be able to give you a block of income . It could be for a time certain . It could be for the rest of your life . It depends upon your time line and what you 're looking for . But you 'll be surprised that most of the people that buy deferred income annuities also buy an inflation rider , a cost-of-living rider , to it so that every year there 's an adjustment made for your income : a block of income that you purchased , plus it goes up , let 's say , 3 % every year annually . And if you buy a lifetime DIA , that premium will go up every year , all the way out until the last day that you live . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Many insurance companies offer annuities such as Guardian , MetLife Prudential , ING , Nationwide , Genworth , and Lincoln National , just to name a few . If you 're looking to purchase an annuity , I would advise consulting with an independent annuity broker who can review options from multiple companies to find you the annuity that will maximize your return . The type of annuity is a major factor as there are a number of different kinds such as fixed annuities , equity linked index annuities , etc. . Please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
There are two genres of Life Insurance , -LRB- Term and Permanent -RRB- , but there are at least 10 different Kinds within those genres . So your question is a very important one to know the answer to ! Universal Life is most often referred to as Permanent insurance , but it 's really a hybrid of Term and Whole Life ... and it will expire and be void of cash value and any benefits at some point unless you ` over fund ' it . Unfortunately that part is rarely explained to people when buying insurance . The main kinds of Term Insurance are Mortgage , Credit and Life . They 're all basically the same in that they are in force for a limited period of time and pay the benefit amount to the named beneficiary upon the death of the insured . In the case of mortgage and credit policies the beneficiary is the mortgage or credit provider . In the case of Term Life usually the beneficiary is the spouse , children or other relative of the insured . Also with Term Life there may be an accelerated benefit rider that pays a percentage of the death benefit to the insured in the case of critical or chronic illness or injury . There are a large variety of Permanent Life policies available . Whole Life Paid Up at a predetermined age , -LRB- such as 65 , 95 , 121 , etc -RRB- , is the kind that never ` expires ' and continues to grow cash value until the benefit is paid . As mentioned above there are `` Universal Life '' policies , which can be ` fixed ' , ` indexed ' or ` variable ' . Indexed and variable are tied to the stock market with regard to their cash value , but all are a hybrid of term and permanent . There are other kinds of Whole Life designed for business partners , -LRB- Buy out -RRB- , and for businesses , -LRB- Key Man -RRB- , etc. . So when looking to implement life insurance your best bet is to utilize the services of an insurance Adviser who is not tied to just one provider and can be unbiased help you to determine the best policy for your specific needs and goals . Please contact me if you want more information .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
That is like asking what kinds of fish will I catch today if I just throw my line into the water . Interest rates on annuities are very different not only from company to company but product to product . Few people purchase an annuity for their interest rates unless the rate is guaranteed for 5-10 year periods . People mainly buy annuities for the no risk guarantees of having lifetime income . If you are comparing interest rates for the long term , annuities will compete . If interest rates are compared for the short term , annuities are not appropriate vehicles because of the surrender charges .
You really should n't start out by deciding how much to pay . You should start out by deciding what kind and how much . You may find that you need some term and some whole-life . Once you determine that find out what the price is for what you need . If it 's too much , buy the term only but make certain that it 's convertible to whole-life later .
Great question ! Accidental death is covered in all insurance policies . Dismemberment however , is not . The kind of policy that you are thinking of is often misunderstood . Some people think that it will serve as good life insurance , thinking that it will provide coverage that it usually does n't . This kind of policy does n't cover any kind of death related to illness or health issue , like cancer or stroke . The normal life insurance policy wo n't cover dismemberment , unless it results in your death . The two policies can be combined by purchasing a life insurance policy with an AD&D `` rider '' -LRB- the policy ` rides ' along on the other , bigger policy -RRB- for a little more in cost . That provides you with terrific coverage , for most any situation . If you need more information , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Yes , you can do a Section 1035 exchange from a life insurance contract to an annuity , just not the other way around . Section 1035 permits the policy owner to trade certain kinds of contracts for another on a tax-free basis . The following types of exchanges are allowed under Section 1035 : Life contract for life contract Life contract for annuity contract Life contract for endowment contract Annuity contract for annuity contract Endowment contract for endowment contract Since 2010 , it is also possible to exchange a life , annuity , or endowment contract for a long-term care contract or exchange one long-term care contract for another long-term care contract .
That 's a great question ! The answer really kind of depends upon how much work you want to put into it to ensure it works . This kind of policy requires that you pay attention to its performance , and that you do your part in looking for a policy that has the best cap rate , highest participation rate , minimal surrender fees , and greatest guarantees . You will also need to be aware of your cash value , and the fees that are coming out of it . Can it work ? Yes , but this is not the type of policy that you can make minimum payments on and forget about , unless you 'd like to find out in a few years that it 's in trouble , and so are you.Especially if the market has been volatile , or taken a down turn . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
There are a lot of different kinds of annuities available from dozens -LRB- perhaps even hundreds -RRB- of insurance companies . Annuities are offered by insurance companies and primarily used as a means of securing a steady cash flow during retirement years . In many ways , an annuity is very much like a pension plan offered by a company for retirement . Perhaps the best feature of an annuity is safety . Insurance companies are rated as a measurement of financial strength and have proven over the past 125 years or so to have financial stability second to no other type of financial institution . In today 's world where fewer and fewer employers offer a pension , planning for a reasonable retirement income stream seems to be challenging for most workers . An annuity -LRB- or even several -RRB- can provide the type of retirement income security that previous generations have enjoyed . Should an annuity be the only retirement income vehicle for you ? Absolutely not . Your retirement income plan should be balanced in a way that works for you . You should always seek the advice of a qualified retirement income planner so that strategies and products can be tailored to your individual situation .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is FIO In Disability Insurance ?
FIO in Disability Insurance stands for Future Income Options . A future income option rider allows the insured person to purchase additional disability insurance as their income grows in their career , without having to qualify for it through medical underwriting . Being able to get additional coverage at the rates while having good health can be a huge benefit .
FIO in Disability Insurance stands for Future Income Options . A future income option rider allows the insured person to purchase additional disability insurance as their income grows in their career , without having to qualify for it through medical underwriting . Being able to get additional coverage at the rates while having good health can be a huge benefit .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
What type of disability insurance should I get ? The one that provides you the best definiton of disability that you can afford . Disability insurance is all about the definition of what is a `` disability '' . What you 'll find is the best disability plans have the fewest words in describing what disability is . Without a solid definition , you have a policy you pay for , that does n't pay you back when you have a claim .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
Some things to consider when buying disability insurance are : 1 -RRB- Do you want short term disability insurance , or long term disability insurance , or both ? Long term disability is recommended if you can not afford both , as the effects of being unable to work for many months or years is the most devastating . 2 -RRB- How much -LRB- what % -RRB- of your income do you wish to replace ? It usually makes sense to get as much as you can . 3 -RRB- Do you want to spend more to have Own Occupation feature ? If not , you will need to go back to work when you can do any job . With `` own occ '' you will be paid until you can go back to your own occupation . 4 -RRB- What about Residual Disability ? Getting a policy that offers Residual Disability enables you to receive a partial benefit based proportionate to the amount of income lost when able to resume working part time -LRB- unlike Partial Disability , which just pays a set % -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What does your policy cover ? Make sure it covers illness and injury , and review the conditions covered .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There 's many companies that offer disability insurance such as Guardian , MetLife , Assurity , Standard , Principal , just to name a few . The DEFINITION OF DISABILITY is the single most important factor when determining which disability insurance policy to apply for . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Knee Replacement Surgery ?
Yes , Medicare does cover knee and hip replacement surgeries . These are very popular surgeries and getting more common all the time . However , the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- is reported to be considering deep cuts in the reimbursements paid to orthopedic doctors for performing this type of operation . It remains to be seen if that comes to pass .
Knee replacement surgery is normally a Medicare covered expense assuming the surgery is considered medically necessary and you are a good candidate for joint replacement . The cost of knee replacement is usually around $ 45,000 but the Medicare allowance is in the $ 11,000 range . If you have a good Medigap plan your share will be significantly less .
Yes . Of course an appropriate diagnosis and recommendation for treatment will have to be made and you will want to exhaust any other less intrusive forms of treatment before you or your health insurance carrier should want to be replacing your original parts . But knee replacements , when medically necessary , are routinely covered services subject to whatever deductible , coinsurance and/or copayments are in your health insurance policy . The state of the art in replacement surgeries for knees and hips have advanced rapidlyand are far less traumatic than they were just a few years ago . I have a friend who recently had hip socket replacement surgery done on an outpatient basis who went in for the procedure early in the morning and walked out using a cane by mid-afternoon .
Yes , Medicare will pay for knee replacement surgeries . Medicare also pays for hip replacements . This type of surgery is one of the larger expenditures by Medicare and provided pain relief and increased mobility to hundreds of thousands of seniors -LRB- and younger persons -RRB- over the years since knee replacement were invented .
Yes , Medicare does cover knee and hip replacement surgeries . These are very popular surgeries and getting more common all the time . However , the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- is reported to be considering deep cuts in the reimbursements paid to orthopedic doctors for performing this type of operation . It remains to be seen if that comes to pass .
If you do have a pre-existing condition , it 's possible that that particular condition would be excluded . For example , if you have had several knee surgeries , it 's most likely that they 'd exclude your knee . Do n't forget that if you get denied for DI due to a pre-exisiting condition , you could still possibly receive critical illness insurance .
Medicare does cover joint replacement if the need to replace the joint is considered medically necessary . Joint replacement includes shoulder , hip , knee and other body joints . Make sure you use a medical provider that accepts assignment . Some replacement joint devices are considered a `` premium '' device . You may be responsible for paying the difference in a basic device and an upgrade . Your provider can advise .
The cost of complete knee replacement is about $ 45,000 . The Medicare allowance is in the $ 11,000 range . A partial knee replacement is about half that amount . As Rick indicated , a good Medigap plan could reduce your out of pocket cost to $ 0 if you had Medicare supplement plan F . A little more with a different plan .
Unfortunately , knee walkers are not normally paid for by Medicare . If you can get a doctor 's prescription saying that crutches or canes will not provide the support needed , it may be possible for Medicare Part B to cover a knee walker . However , providers of knee walkers generally state that Medicare does not cover this type of walker at this point in time , and under most circumstances .
Medicare is very comprehensive health coverage for those that qualify . Medicare will cover a Total Knee Replacement as long as the Physician , Hospital , and any other healthcare providers are deemed as providers . You can check each provider out on the Medicare.gov website . Medicare Part A would cover the hospital expenses and if a Skilled Nursing Facility is needed for rehabilitation . You will have a deductible if you only have Medicare A and B . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of the out of pocket costs . Medicare Part B would cover the Physician charges and any outpatient services required . You have an annual deductible and 20 % coinsurance . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of these our to pocket cost . Medicare Advantage plans have daily charges and copays that vary for every plan . You should check with the plan to confirm that the providers are in their network and determine what your costs might be .
Medicare will pay for hip replacements , if medically necessary . Ca n't say which is # 1 and which is # 2 , but hip and knee replacements and cataracts are the the first things people get when they become eligible for Medicare . If you are anticipating a hip replacement , sign on for for original Medicare and a Medicare supplement . If you go the Advantage route you will pay $ 2000 - $ 3000 OOP .
Medicare will pay for Euflexxa injections for the knee only . As with all treatments , it must be determined to be medically necessary to be covered by Medicare . Evidence of osteoarthritis of the knee is required by X-ray in order for Medicare to cover hyaluronan injections , of which Euflexxa is one .
Yes Medicare does pay for Medically necessary knee replacement . If all you have is original Medicare you will be responsible for your Part A Hospital deductible and possibly some Part B Medical expenses . If you must do rehab in a nursing facility , the first 20 days will be paid at 100 % . Some rehab done at home may also be paid for .
Yes , Medicare will pay for Synvisc-One injections if for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee . The osteoarthritis must be verified by X-Ray and of course , the one giving the injection must be Medicare approved . It can only be given once every 6 months and only osteoarthritis of the knee is approved by Medicare for Synvisc , which is a hyalauronan drug .
Medicare will cover Euflexxa and otherHyaluronan injections for osteoarthritis of the knee , only . The injectable drugs covered are Euflexxa , Hyalgan , Synvisc , Supartz , Orthovisc , and Synvisc One . The osteoarthritis of the knee must be proven by x-ray and no more than one injection will be paid for in every 6 months .
I am correcting my original answer due to a message I received from a helpful reader : Florida BC/BS and Oklahoma Health Care Authority have listed this drug as well as the other hyaluronic acid injections as non-covered based on the May 2013 AAOS release of Treatment of Osteoarthritic of the Knee : Evidence Based Guidance which included information that this treatment for OA of the knee is no longer recommended .
Knee walkers can be a covered expense under Medicare if your doctor approves the equipment . As with any DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- purchase you should use a Medicare approved supplier that accepts Medicare assignment . Providers that do not accept assignment can balance bill you which will substantially increase your OOP expenses .
Medicare Part B covers some DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including wheelchairs , walkers , hospital beds and lift chairs . The need for a mobility assist device must be documented by your doctor and a prescription must be written . You must be diagnosed with some form of muscular or joint disorder of the knees or hips . The Medicare allowance usually is limited to $ 300 .
I believe Medicare can help pay for a lift chair , if there 's a medical necessity -LRB- for those with severe hip or knee arthritis , or a neuromuscular disease , and can not get up from a seated position to stand on their own -RRB- , as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- under your Medicare Part B insurance . Part B would pay 80 % of the cost and you would be responsible for the remaining 20 % . I 'd recommend calling Medicare to get more specific input .
Hip replacement surgery is covered under Medicare Part A because you will be admitted into the hospital for that type of surgery . When you leave the hospital Part B of Medicare will cover your follow up doctor 's visits and any physical therapy the doctor wants you to have . If you have a Medicare Supplement to go along with your Original Medicare your out of pocket cost for hip replacement surgery should be very low .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Corporate Owned Life Insurance Ethical ?
A corporation operates as a person and as such can buy life insurance . They can only buy life insurance on someone with whom they have an insurable interest . They can not select someone at random , purchase insurance on them and then hope that they die soon . A corporation would suffer a loss if a key person were to die prematurely . The corporation may have other obligations such as buying back the shares of a deceased shareholder . There are many reasons that a corporation can and should purchase life insurance .
That 's a great question ! I 'm sure we 'd all agree that we expect all businesses to operate ethically , and with the best of intentions . So I guess your question comes down to one of two things - is life insurance a scam ? Or does the life insurance my company supplies as a part of my benefits package need to be there ? In either case , the answer is that life insurance is a blessing . It is a certainty that you will die . Tough , but true . If your employer provides life insurance for you , and you 've opted to take it and die while employed , that benefit can be a big help in paying for your funeral and providing for those you 've left behind . That is true for the independent policy that you hopefully purchased from a reputable , well respected insurance company . -LRB- And went over thoroughly with an agent that you trust . -RRB- Are there fly by night or poorly managed companies out there that may skirt the edges of ethical integrity ? I 'd like to believe not , but there seems to be a bad apple in every bunch , so it is well for you to look into any company and agency before signing anything . And put stock into the old saying `` if it sounds too good to be true , it probably is '' ... That said , I am sure that the number of ethical agencies far far outweighs the bad ones . Hope that helps ! Any questions , please hit the contact me link , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
In a word yes . It might be easier to think of the Corporation as a separate tax paying entity . There are a number of reasons when the corporation would need or be justified in purchasing life insurance . They include : key person , buy-sell agreements , executive retention . The company would suffer an economic loss and it is prudent for the company to own life insurance . The ethical question has to due with intent . In Canada , if an individual ; is getting a benefit and the company is not getting value from the purchase of a life insurance policy there are issues . May or may not be ethical , but it probably will be a taxable benefit to the individual . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The simple answer is `` Yes ! '' Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is ethical . However , in recent years , because of some of the abuses , it has become more scrutinized in its uses . There are many valid reasons for using COLI . It could be very important to a company if a key person in their company died . In some cases , it would take months or years to replace that person with a specific skill set ; so COLI maybe purchased to offset the loss . It may also be used as `` golden handcuffs '' , where the life insurance builds cash value for a future date to pay executive retirement beyond a 401k . This can be done formally , through legal documents -LRB- the IRS even identifies it by code number much like `` 401k '' -RRB- . The unethical part came into play when companies purchased life insurance of people where they had no insurable interest -LRB- in other words would not be at risk of significant loss by the death of the person insured under the policy -RRB- . For example , CompanyZ purchased COLI on all of its 22,000 employees - from executives done to the maintenance.When a rank-in-file employee died , Company Z kept the death benefit , giving them a tax free benefit . The courts decided that Company Z did not have an insurable interest and required them to pay the family the death benefit . The policy was clearly determined not to be COLI but to be STOLI -LRB- Stranger Owned Life Insurance -RRB- .
In a word yes . It might be easier to think of the Corporation as a separate tax paying entity . There are a number of reasons when the corporation would need or be justified in purchasing life insurance . They include : key person , buy-sell agreements , executive retention . The company would suffer an economic loss and it is prudent for the company to own life insurance . The ethical question has to due with intent . In Canada , if an individual ; is getting a benefit and the company is not getting value from the purchase of a life insurance policy there are issues . May or may not be ethical , but it probably will be a taxable benefit to the individual . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The simple answer is `` Yes ! '' Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is ethical . However , in recent years , because of some of the abuses , it has become more scrutinized in its uses . There are many valid reasons for using COLI . It could be very important to a company if a key person in their company died . In some cases , it would take months or years to replace that person with a specific skill set ; so COLI maybe purchased to offset the loss . It may also be used as `` golden handcuffs '' , where the life insurance builds cash value for a future date to pay executive retirement beyond a 401k . This can be done formally , through legal documents -LRB- the IRS even identifies it by code number much like `` 401k '' -RRB- . The unethical part came into play when companies purchased life insurance of people where they had no insurable interest -LRB- in other words would not be at risk of significant loss by the death of the person insured under the policy -RRB- . For example , CompanyZ purchased COLI on all of its 22,000 employees - from executives done to the maintenance.When a rank-in-file employee died , Company Z kept the death benefit , giving them a tax free benefit . The courts decided that Company Z did not have an insurable interest and required them to pay the family the death benefit . The policy was clearly determined not to be COLI but to be STOLI -LRB- Stranger Owned Life Insurance -RRB- .
The question of is life insurance ethical could be taken two different ways . First is it ethical to provide an affordable product to protect the ones you love by caring for them financially after you die , I would have to answer yes . We are a consuming society that is bloated in debt , people are failing to save for their own futures , let alone the futures of those that should matter most . I ca n't think of a scenario where life insurance if purchased correctly would be unethical . The second way to read your question would be are life insurance companies ethical . Life insurance companies are some of the most regulated companies of any industry . They must meet federal and state guidelines at all times . Their products must be filed for approval before they are sent to market . My answer to your question asked in this way would also have to be yes . Life insurance is ethical .
If you asking if the concept of Life Insurance is ethical , the conscience of mankind and many religions affirm the concept of making a plan to help care for those for who you are responsible , if you are not there to fulfill those duties due to death . If you are asking if Life Insurance products are ethical , they must meet extremely high standards . If you are asking if the sale of Life Insurance is ethical , that does depend , somewhat , on who you purchase it from . All Life insurance agents are bound by rules of ethics , and must take ethics classes periodically to hold a license . However , you still would be wise to review the agency you are using to be assured that it will go above and beyond to give you a fair and honest assessment .
That 's a tough one to gauge , because not all health insurers are in every state or every county of the states they are in . And most of the data that is compiled is based off of a limited range of surveying . But , to me , you grade a health insurer 's ethics on several factors : the number of people they serve , the number of complaints ruled against them -LRB- not # of filed , because most complaints that are filed are dropped due to consumer 's misrepresentation -RRB- , their financial stability rating to pay claims , and the strictness of underwriting guidelines and # of denied applications -LRB- though you wo n't have to worry about that for the most part starting Jan 1 , 2014 -RRB- . Those are most important , but you secondly should look at their quality of customer service , their rates , number and quality of providers in their network , and type of plan it is -LRB- HMO , PPO , POS , FFS , ACO , etc. -RRB- . It all depends on how each individual defines ethical . Because you might find a company most ethical because they have the best doctors and hospitals in your area , pay their claims fast , have the best customer claims and billing service , and have the lowest complaints . But to another they 're unethical because their rates are 23 % higher , they do n't cover them across state lines , and they would n't insure their wife because she has diabetes . So , it 's really what you value as ethical . But , the best way to find the best company for you , is to find a good local health insurance broker that represents all insurers in your area and ask them those questions . Because , they will know better than anyone which company is best for you and the most ethical because they have dealt with all aspects with most of them on a regular basis . Plus , having a broker or agent on your side , fighting for you on any wrongdoing by the insurance company , will help your case and make your life a whole lot easier and save you time ... You wo n't just be a policy # in a computer , we help you put a face and story to their considerations ! And , even if after a chat with the broker and them recommending some plans , do your own research on those plans . Here are some good resources to look up plans and companies in your area , and how they stack up . Your State Insurance Department is a good start : WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK
Corporations can buy annuities as long as the issuing company allows that particular annuity product to be owned by a corporation . However , a corporate owned annuity is not tax deferred . At one time it was , but the IRS changed this rule . Corporations use annuities to fund corporate benefit plans , and to just accumulate assets for the future .
Ethics is a big debate on many laws not just health insurance . Unfortunately like so many laws ethics can vary since so many people these days have a different code of ethics . With that being said the law is you must have health insurance or be penalized for not having the coverage .
You may already understand this but for our readers who may not , when we think about McDonald 's or some similar organization , we are really thinking about two distinct & separate entities that we put together in our minds . There is the big corporate McDonalds , which does n't really sell hamburgers , they sell franchises to sell hamburgers . Then there is your local McDonald 's restaurant , which is usually a locally or regionally owned franchise . Corporate McDonalds is a major corporation and provides the kinds of employee benefits one would expect in a Fortune 500 environment . That is totally separate and distinct from your local franchise owner who may own just a few McDonalds locations and is a small business person . This is the public face you see but associate with the corporate marketing imprint from decades of market presence and lots of advertising . Benefit decisions are an individual franchise owner 's issue not so much for the corporate McDonalds -LRB- though they do provide some guidance and access -RRB- to be involved with . This is a question you need to ask at the local employer level . Employee benefits in the fast food industry are the exception rather than the rule for reasons such as the income levels of the employees , lots of part-time employees , high turnover and relatively slim profit margins for many franchise owners , especially in the early years of their businesses .
That 's a great question ! I 'm sure we 'd all agree that we expect all businesses to operate ethically , and with the best of intentions . So I guess your question comes down to one of two things - is life insurance a scam ? Or does the life insurance my company supplies as a part of my benefits package need to be there ? In either case , the answer is that life insurance is a blessing . It is a certainty that you will die . Tough , but true . If your employer provides life insurance for you , and you 've opted to take it and die while employed , that benefit can be a big help in paying for your funeral and providing for those you 've left behind . That is true for the independent policy that you hopefully purchased from a reputable , well respected insurance company . -LRB- And went over thoroughly with an agent that you trust . -RRB- Are there fly by night or poorly managed companies out there that may skirt the edges of ethical integrity ? I 'd like to believe not , but there seems to be a bad apple in every bunch , so it is well for you to look into any company and agency before signing anything . And put stock into the old saying `` if it sounds too good to be true , it probably is '' ... That said , I am sure that the number of ethical agencies far far outweighs the bad ones . Hope that helps ! Any questions , please hit the contact me link , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is life insurance that a corporation takes out on the lives of one or more employees , with the benefits payable to the corporation or the employee 's families . COLI can be structured to fund certain types of nonqualified plans , such as split-dollar life insurance that allows the company to recoup its premium with part of the death benefit and the rest of the death benefit going to the employees ' beneficiaries . Many corporations these days use COLI to insure key employees , with the corporation receiving the death benefit so they can find and hire a new employee , or as part of a buy-sell agreement so they can buy a partner 's share . of stock .
In Canada , in most cases , life insurance premiums are not deductible . There are a couple of exceptions : 1 . If the insured is applying for a loan and the institution lending the funds requests that he or she buy life insurance as collateral , a portion of the premiums on that policy qualify as a deductible expense -LRB- the Net Cost of Pure Insurance -RRB- 2 . Where a donor donates a life insurance policy to a charity or a charity takes out a policy on the donors life , the premiums paid by the donor will be considered a charitable donation eligible for a charitable tax credit -LRB- for individuals -RRB- or deduction -LRB- for corporations -RRB- . Even though it is not deductible there are several situations where corporate owned life insurance should be considered . For example : The insurance is required to fund a buy-sell agreement , there will be more than one insured shareholder . There will probably be different ages and unequal premium rates . There may also be cost differences among shareholders due to underwriting premium ratings . Corporate-owned policies help to equalize the resulting premium differences . The taxpayer with the lowest tax rate requires less pre-tax income to pay the premiums ; their dollars are cheaper . In many cases that could be the corporation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . -LRB- Since tax laws vary by jurisdiction and do change , check with your local tax and professional advisors . -RRB- Note : The information contained in this article is intended to provide general guidelines only . The application and impact of the law can vary widely from case to case based on the specific or unique facts involved . Accordingly , the information in this article is not intended to serve as legal , accounting or tax advice . Users are encouraged to consult with their professional advisers for advice concerning specific matters before making a decision .
You ask a philosophical question in a practical environment . My personal opinion is that it is not ethical to force a person to purchase any product or service . The counterpart to that though is that it is not ethical for someone to expect others to pay their health care expenses . In a perfect world everyone would act responsibly , a part of which is managing life 's risks , one of which is your health care needs , both present and future . As experience has shown us , not everyone acts responsibly and every individual has their own idea on what an acceptable level of risk is for them . A health insurance plan with a $ 10,000 deductible would be of no concern to Bill Gates or Donald Trump , that same degree of financial exposure would be a financial catastrophe for a minimum wage worker . Other people are philosophically opposed to the concept of health insurance and others just do n't have enough regard for their fellow citizens that they feel any guilt about passing their burdens off onto their neighbors . Our society is struggling with this issue and will be for years to come . What you must come to grips with is that as of 2014 you now are in a legalenvironment which does essentially require that you have health insurance . Fortunately , at this time , it is not a criminal offense to not have health insurance and you are only subject to a mild -LRB- but growing over time -RRB- penalty for being uninsured .
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
A corporation operates as a person and as such can buy life insurance . They can only buy life insurance on someone with whom they have an insurable interest . They can not select someone at random , purchase insurance on them and then hope that they die soon . A corporation would suffer a loss if a key person were to die prematurely . The corporation may have other obligations such as buying back the shares of a deceased shareholder . There are many reasons that a corporation can and should purchase life insurance .
Broad questions deserve broad answers and so the question as to taxation of life insurance benefits is this : Generally , life insurance benefits are paid free of income taxation when paid to individuals . But , there are exceptions and possible complications to this simple answer . One big potential problem is when the decedent is also the policy owner and the life insurance gets added to the value of an estate and then taxed in that way . The IRS looks for incidents of ownership up three years prior to the death . Also , life insurance paid to an estate that is subject to other forms of taxation may result in the life benefits being taxed as well so it is n't always a good idea to pay life benefits to an estate . Also , life insurance after the first $ 50,000 is taxed when premium was paid by the employer . Life insurance you buy separately under group options are generally not taxed as income -LRB- provided all the rules are followed - see above -RRB- . Also , generally when a corporation pays the premium and the benefits are payable to the corporation , they ca n't write off the premium and collect the benefit free of income taxation . Under current law life insurance proceeds are only excludable up to the amounts of premium paid by the corpo in following with laws placed on the books in 2006 . There is a whole host of rules that must be followed to avoid taxation but it is possible that life insurance can be paid to a corporation and avoid taxation . While most of us will not be subject to taxation on the life insurance benefit it pays to understand how these benefits become taxable . Then , it is reasonably easy to avoid these pitfalls . Do n't also overlook the advice of a good agent and avoid the use of life insurance trusts to make sure the money moves to the beneficiary without taxation to the largest extent possible .
A sole proprietor or partner can not deduct the premiums for life insurance on the owner or partner . You shouldnt want to deduct the premiums . You want to receive death benefits income tax free . If your business is a corporation , the corporation can deduct the premiums just the same way they can deduct any payment made to you as either salary or benefits , but the corporation can not have any ownership rights . You would then pay personal income tax on the premiums paid by the corporation .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Long Is A Child Covered Under Health Insurance ?
For most people the answer is that children can be covered under their parent 's health insurance until age 26 . Children must be covered even if they are married , no longer enrolled in school , or not claimed as a dependent on tax returns . The Afffordable Care Act added this requirement . Grandfathered plans are exempt from the requirement . Some states may have additional requirements for dependents . For example , NJ has a requirement to cover dependents up to age 30 with different exclusion rules .
That is a great question ! Thanks to the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , your children can now be covered until they reach the age of 26 . The extension of the age limit really helped young people who were struggling with getting started and dealing with college expenses by allowing the parents to carry the burden of the insurance.Thanks for asking !
That depends entirely upon how the child support agreement was constructed . If there is not a specific requirement in the child support agreement that the person required to provide child support is required to provide health insurance for the child -LRB- ren -RRB- then there is a very high probability that they would not be required to provide health insurance . So , if the child support judgment requires one partner to just pay `` X '' amount of dollars every month for child support and makes no mention of a requirement to provide health insurance either out of that amount or in addition to it is unlikely that without a new judgment the ex-partner would have to provide health insurance . In my experience , a good divorce attorney specifically addresses this issue in writing in the order of child support as to which parent has the responsibility for providing health insurance for dependent children and even the potential duration of this requirement and the circumstances where it might be voided -LRB- re-marriage for example -RRB- . I am sure the rules on this crucial issue vary from state to state . Any couple with children who are divorcing should have this issue of responsibility for health insurance coverage clearly spelled out in their divorce and child support agreement .
In the context of health insurance , qualifying events are certain life events that meet criteria established by the IRS and now , also Health and Human Services , that would allow an individual to enroll in individual health insurance outside of the normal annual open enrollment period established under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . Common examples of qualifying events are ; 1 -RRB- Loss of health insurance coverage through your employer 2 -RRB- Expiration of your health insurance coverage through a former employer under the Federal COBRA regulations or state continuation of coverage provisions 3 -RRB- Loss of coverage under a government sponsored plan , including Medicaid or CHIP 4 -RRB- Loss of Minimum Essential Coverage -LRB- e.g. - state high risk pool , student health plan -RRB- 5 -RRB- Birth or adoption of a child or establishing foster care or legal guardianship of a child 6 -RRB- Marriage 7 -RRB- No longer an eligible dependent -LRB- e.g. - child turning age 26 -RRB- 8 -RRB- Divorce from a policyholder 9 -RRB- Termination of a pre-Affordable Care Act individual plan during 2014 10 -RRB- Moving to a new area that offers different plan options or outside of an HMO service area 11 -RRB- Employer bankruptcy resulting in loss of coverage for retirees 12 -RRB- Return from active military service 13 -RRB- Release from incarceration 14 -RRB- Unintentional error or enrollment/disenrollment in a health insurance marketplace plan is unintentional or erroneous 15 -RRB- Newly eligible/ineligible for exchange subsidies or premium tax credit or cost-sharing reductions 16 -RRB- A material violation committed by the health plan You should operate under the assumption that you have 60-days after such a `` Qualifying Life Event '' to complete your application for new health insurance coverage .
Child Riders : I always offer a child rider to parents . Recently -LRB- today -RRB- I added $ 20,000 child rider a mother 's policy . It cost her a whopping $ 8.60 . Not each , but for all 4 children . So the cost per child is $ 2.15 . And if she has more children or adopts they are covered from the 15th day of life with no qualifying . No extra cost . The automatic coverage has meant the difference of being able to cover a child born with a grave illness or not . Which brings up another benefit of most child riders . Guaranteed convertibility of up 5 or 6 times the amount . In the case above when a child reaches age 25 they have the guaranteed right to convert the $ 20,000.00 rider to $ 100,000.00 Permanent plan . No medical questions , no exams , no blood work . At standard rates . That is a huge benefit . We have converted young cancer patients , a Marine in Iraq and a 25 year old that had been in a coma for years to name a few . All for $ 8.60 or $ 2.15 per child . And they can still buy individual policies on the kids . Or use the saved money to buy much more coverage on mom and dad . Individual child policies : I am also a big proponent of short paying a childs policy . Actually just about anyone under 60 that can afford the extra premium . I do not really show cash values on small policies as they take a very long time to grow and normally do not amount to much . Twenty years ago we were selling $ 5,000 Burial and Child plans . While better than nothing , the now grown children are underwhelmed with the face amount or small cash values . Today I am suggesting much larger plans . Not child plans but plans that will be worth more when they are adults and need to protect their own children . $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 or even $ 250,000 plans are not unusual and very reasonable from top rated Insurance Companies . Starting at about $ 20 . As always an experienced Life Insurance Agent is your best source of information . One that has more than one or two companies or types of insurance .
A child rider on Term life insurance adds life insurance to your policy that will cover your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . It is usually available to children age 15 days to approx age 17 -LRB- the age varies by company -RRB- . You select a face amount of the child rider , usually between $ 5,000 and $ 25,000 . This that would pay if a tragedy occurred in your family , and you lost one or more of your children . The child rider benefit would pay that entire amount for each deceased child . The rider pays for death by any reason , just as your policy does , with the exception of suicide in first two years , or if your child had a serious health condition that was not disclosed on the application and death occurred during the first two years of purchasing the rider . If your child has type 1 diabetes , intellectual disability , or other maladies , unfortunately , they will not be able to be on the rider.Therefore , it is good to get the rider while your first child is young ; then the rest are automatically added . While few children pass away , the real value of a child rider can come when your child turns approx 25 -LRB- again , the age varies by company -RRB- . At that time the child rider can usually be changed to a permanent life insurance policy of about 5 times the face amount of the child rider . They do not ask any health questions , so if your child developed an illness after being put on the rider , it will not matter . They will then have a reasonably priced life insurance policy for the rest of their lives .
One of the first changes to come from the passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- when it was passed in March of 2010 was to extend the period of time that a child could be covered as a dependent under their parent 's major medical insurance . Children can be covered under their parent 's health plan up to age 26 . The child does not have to be dependent uponthe parent and it does not matter if the child is employed and has coverage available through their job or if they are married and could be covered under their spouse 's health insurance .
If you are covered under a group health plan you have 30-days after the child has been born to add the child to your coverage . As a general rule , adding dependents to your group health coverage requires the provision of the dependent 's Social Security number . This is a point of confusion and concern for many new parents as it can take several weeks before they receive a Social Security number for their newborn child . You should proceed with completing and submitting the paperwork to add the child to your employer 's health insurance carrier with a note that a Social Security number has been applied for and will be forwarded to them upon receipt . In the individual health insurance marketplace essentially the same 30-day rule applies . The exceptions being that you must request enrollment within 60 days of the loss of coverage under a State CHIP or Medicaid program or the determination of eligibility for premium assistance under those programs . Marlin McKelvy Consumer Directed Benefit Solutions www.cdbsagency.com
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
There is three reasons to insure a child with permanent life insurance . First , the reason no one likes to think about , but a child 's death is devastating on all levels , but is a possibility . Not having the money to bury a child just adds extra hardship during an extremely difficult time . Second reason is to protect the child 's insurability . Once the child has a life insurance policy , they can in most cases increase face amounts without proof of underwriting . This is crucial to a child diagnosed with type I diabetes , cancer or even worse . The third and final reason to insure a child with life insurance is the cash value . Not only can you use the policy as a teaching moment for the child to learn to save but the many uses as the child grows into an adult . Cash value from a life insurance policy can be used for emergencies , hardships , as well as college , a down payment on a first house or even retirement . Child life insurance is so affordable and important , every parent should strongly consider it for their children .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
Several reasons , some pretty straight forward and some you may not have given thought to . First is the misfortune of losing a child . What will you do ? Will you need time ? Will you need money to purchase the things you and your spouse want to for the child ? Can you turn to your spouse and say `` No , we ca n't aford that headstone , let 's get something cheaper . '' ? While it is easy to have an answer when not faced with the situation . It 's another thing to live through losing a child . Now for the positive . Locking permanent life insurance in for a child gives them the best price at the lowest cost when they are in the best health . The opportunity to build cash values over a long period of time is pretty good . The other thing you can do with a child 's policy is buy future insurability options where your child can increase their insurance later in life without medical underwriting at the same class . What these future options do is `` take away '' an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child later in life when maybe their health is not so good . This feature alone is more valuable than most imagine . I have insurance on my kids , never thought of a good honest reason not to provide it for them . It covered them while they grew and gives them a headstart as adults . It 's a positive thing to do .
In what way do you mean ? As a college funding choice , possibly , but it would require significant investment that might be better spent on the parents to insure college . A life insurance policy on a child is a good idea for several reasons . Set up properly it is a financial cornerstone to a sound financial portfolio beginning for a child as they grow into adulthood . Imagine locking in a price that is extremely low and having it gain in value over the years into adulthood . Add the option of guaranteed insurability to the plan and you 've taken away the ability for an insurance company to say `` no '' to your child in the future . That is extremely valuable . Now , let 's look at the sad side of insurance on a child . What if you need it ? As heartbreaking as it would be to lose a child , imagine having to figure out what you can `` afford '' for a service or headstone ? Imagine how much time you 'll need off of work and what your employer would cover salary wise ? For the same reason I purchased insurance as a young single man , long before I went into this business , I did n't want a double or triple whammy for my parents who would already be dealing with my death . Throw lost wages in there and having to find the money to bury me and I 've created devastation in my household . While may God forbid , if you were to lose a child , is n't that enough ?
Yes , you can . What kind of health insurance you can get your newborn will depend upon your circumstances but your ability to qualify for and to be offered coverage are guaranteed by law now . If you or your spouse are employed and have health insurance through your employer then you may want to add the child as a dependent on your group coverage . Your child can also qualify for an individual health insurance policy that is guaranteed to be issued and that can not have any pre-existing conditions limits or exclusions . And , depending upon your income level , your newborn may qualify for health coverage under government programs such as the Children 's Health Insurance Program -LRB- CHIP -RRB- or Medicaid . Whichever way you go to get health insurance coverage for your newborn get the child enrolled within 30-days of their birth .
As long as your child is driving your car or a car titled to you , you can keep your child on your insurance . Once your child purchases a car in your child 's name that child must purchase their own insurance . There is no age requirement , it is based on who owns the car , you or your child .
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
How much is life insurance for kids ? As few as a couple dollars a month upward . A parent can spend a few dollars a month and have a child rider attached to their policy and provide a small term policy for their child . Or a parent could spend a bit more and purchase a whole life or other cash value policy and create the first building block in a financial plan for their children . A big thing to consider with a child 's policy is buying the future insurability option . What this does very simply , is take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child later on in life if they wish to purchase additional life insurance . You may need to think about that one but how often can you think of any situation where you can take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to you ? The future insurability option LOCKS in a `` yes '' several times through your child 's life for a very small amount of premium .
The more accurate question is why do parents want to take out life insurance on their infant child ? You may want to cover final expenses in the death of the child . You may want to start a long term savings program for your child . You may want to purchase the maximum the carrier allows for the future of your childs insurability , especially if your familys health history includes chronic illnesses . But keep in mind , most life insurance carriers will not issue a policy on a child if the parents have no coverage of their own .
Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- dependent children are allowed to stay on their parent 's health insurance coverage until age 26 . This is without regard to the whether the dependent child is or is not a full-time student , is married , or has coverage available through their own employer . So , in the vast majority of situations a dependent child can not be kicked off their parents coverage until they turn 26 . I say the vast majority of cases because in typical fashion there are these odd quirks in the law that no one read before they passed it . One of those odd quirks applies to what are called `` grandfathered '' health plans -LRB- policies that were in effect prior to the March 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act . Buried in the fine print is a provision that became applicable on January 1 , 2014 . Under this provision , if the adult dependent child does have health insurance available to them through their employer then they can be dropped from their parent 's coverage . As such , whether your parent 's individual or group health insurance plan qualifies as a `` grandfathered '' policy can be a crucial factor in determining the adult dependent 's eligibility for continued coverage .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Who Can Get USAA Car Insurance ?
Their recent T.V. commercials are pretty good , with the people of all ages , who state that they have a USAA policy through various military service and family connections . The first level of those who are eligible for their policies are active , retired and/or enlisted U.S. military personnel . Also eligible are Officer Candidate personnel , such as ROTC and other military service candidate programs . Additionally , the adult -LRB- 18 + age -RRB- children of parents who either had or currently have a USAA auto or home product and widows or widowers of former USAA auto and home policyholders are eligible .
To get USAA insurance , you must be a member of USAA . To be eligible to be a member of USAA , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from the US military . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , . 4 -RRB- You are a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
Persons who are members of USAA are eligible for USAA life insurance . Here are some ways to be eligible -LRB- only one is necessary -RRB- : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from that service . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , or a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
That depends . USAA was formed to offer insurance products to members of the armed forces and their families . So , if you are or were a member of the US armed forces , you can get your insurance through a USAA agent . You may also be able to get your insurance through USAA if one of your parents was in the armed forces . They may require you to get their service number for verification . In my experience , USAA offers personal insurance like home and auto and they may have other lines as well as some other services like financing . I 've run into USAA policies from time to time and they seem to have pretty good products and pretty competitive rates . if you find a good agent that you can trust this could be a good option if you qualify .
USAA Life Insurance has been a solid company since it started in 1922 . It is composed of members who are part of the military and their families . Moody 's rating service gave USAA its highest rating of Aaa in 2012 . USAA Life Insurance products come in several types and are good products . For those who can not get life insurance due to serving in an unsafe country or being in active service , USAA is there for them .
The following people are eligible to apply for USAA Auto insurance : Active , retired and honorably separated officers and enlisted personnel of the U.S. military . Officer candidates in commissioning programs -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . Adult children whose eligible parents have or had a USAA auto or property insurance product . Widows and widowers of USAA members who have or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy . If you or your spouse served in the military , you will need to provide the following information for that person : Date of birth Social Security number USAA number Military enlistment , commissioning , retirement or separation date
Yes , USAA does have life insurance . USAA offers life insurance in the products : Level Term , Military Term , Universal Life , Whole Life , and Combination , per the USAA website . You can compare USAA prices to others by first going to the USAA website to get their quotes , then input your information in a website that offers quotes from many different companies .
Their recent T.V. commercials are pretty good , with the people of all ages , who state that they have a USAA policy through various military service and family connections . The first level of those who are eligible for their policies are active , retired and/or enlisted U.S. military personnel . Also eligible are Officer Candidate personnel , such as ROTC and other military service candidate programs . Additionally , the adult -LRB- 18 + age -RRB- children of parents who either had or currently have a USAA auto or home product and widows or widowers of former USAA auto and home policyholders are eligible .
If USAA had the best autoeveryone would have USAA and everyone else would go out of business . I am an independent agent for dozens of companies and I get asked this question all the time . Who is the best ? My answer is there is no one company that is the best . Each individualor familymeetsdifferent criteria and have different needs . My job is to asses those needs and based on the information find the correct coverages at the most affordable rates . USAA is a good company but do they match up in every case . Absolutely not . And the reason for this is no company wants all the risk . As much as it seems by advertising insurance companies want everything in reality insurance companies only want to take on a certain percentage of risk and spread the rest around .
USAA does indeed sell life insurance . USAA -LRB- United Services Automobile Association -RRB- is a Texas based insurance carrier founded in 1922 to serve the financial needs of past and present members of our armed forces . USAA life insurance plans can be very competitive in some situations . You should always compare rates to other carriers when shopping for life insurance . You should also factor in underwriting , which can significantly impact the final rate .
USAA does not offer their own Long Term Care Insurance coverage underwritten by USAA Life Insurance Company . However , through their website they offer long term care insurance from John Hancock Life Insurance Company . You can contact a USAA agent , call their home office , or visit their website for more information .
USAA is a great carrier but I have seen with many of my clients the rates are very high for home insurance they are fantastic for autos but I also have recently been able to compete with them also . To give you and example I had an insurance that had a home insured for 150K with 1000 deductible with USAA I was able to write the policy with another carrier and insured the home for 175K with 500 deductible and the house was a full replacement cost policy and the rate was only 600 a year and USAA was 1200 a year with less coverage and higher deductible . I would call around to a local agent . It never hurts to compare just make sure that you are getting the proper coverage and if it is a replacement cost policy or actual cash policy
USAA 's website states that their long term care insurance is underwritten by John Hancock Life Insurance Company -LRB- USA -RRB- . USAA Life General Agency -LRB- known in CA and NY as USAA Life and Health Insurance Agency -RRB- acts as an agent to provide long term care insurance to its members . Plans are not available in all states .
USAA is a very good and large insurer that operates as an auto insurer and as such may be higher or lower than a competitor . A few years ago my daughter moved from USAA to another independent agency company and was able to buy a renters policy , and auto policy and an umbrella all for less than her USAA auto policy . All auto insurance is regulated by individual states , so you can expect that an usurer can reflect its appetite for auto insurance in that state in its pricing . No company can be the least expensive in every state for every set of conditions . That is not a realistic expectation . You should be aware too that insurers often build elaborate rating algorithms which can produce several million price points across their business in a particular state . So your carrier may believe that a 16 year old with Corvette is not insurable to that carrier while another insurer might say the exposure is fine since they are exacting what they consider an adequate rate for the exposure .
USAA is an excellent carrier with a long and storied past . Their support for our armed services personnel and their families is without equal . USAA -LRB- United Services Automobile Association -RRB- is a Texas based insurance carrier founded in 1922 to serve the financial needs of past and present members of our armed forces . In some situations , the USAA policies are quite competitive and in other areas you can find a better value .
While USAA offers a very large roster of insurance products , USAA does not sell Disability Insurance . To get Disability Insurance , you can contact a Life Insurance agency that sells Disability Insurance either in a brick and mortar office or on the internet , or locate a disability insurance broker locally or online .
USAA auto insurance , like most major car insurance carriers , covers rentals . The coverage you have depends on the type of policy you purchase , and what riders -LRB- if any -RRB- you have placed on your policy . Contact USAA directly for specific information about your policy . You 'll receive fast accurate information by phone or via email . As an experienced broker , providing quick and accurate information is one of the tasks we must do on a daily ongoing basis .
No , USAA does not offer Long Term Care Insurance through their own company . However , USAA agents can help you purchase Long Term Care Insurance underwritten by John Hancock . In order to get a Long Term Care quote from several companies so that you can find your best price , contact a brokerage that sells Long Term Care policies and can explain the features and pros and cons of each type of policy to you .
USAA car insurance is cheaper than a lot of other companies in many areas . However , they are not the least expensive option in all states and for all drivers . Typically , as a broker that has been in the business for 32 years , our job is to shop , research and compare the most affordable auto insurance rates for you and your vehicles . At times , USAA may offer the best deals . But many other times , another carrier will be best . For example , Esurance , Progressive , Geico , Farmers , Liberty Mutual and Allstate are just a handful of insurers that at any given time may offer the lowest prices . As mentioned , our job is to take the time -LRB- utilizing state-of-the-art software -RRB- to find the best rates and offer them to you via email or through our websites .
Unfortunately , USAA does not have their own Disability Insurance policy for purchase . USAA does carry many other types of insurance policies . In order to purchase Disability Insurance , you can search on the internet for a Life Insurance company that offers a variety of Disability Insurance policies so that you can find the one with your best price and features .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Be Used As Collateral For A Loan ?
My colleagues have handled this pretty well actually . As has been said , there are a couple of factors and ways that Life Insurance may be used as collateral for a loan . The most common requiers the policy to be some form of permanent Life Insurance with a reportable cash value . These types of policies are certainly considered when a commercial banking institution is measuring one 's net worth and underwriting a loan application just as bank accounts or other investment holdings . However , if the loan is for business purposes , for example , if a contractor is purchasing a major piece of equipment , a condition of the loan may be the purchase of even a short term Life policy which would then be collaterally assigned to the lending institution .
Life insurance is required as collateral at the lenders request . The SBA does not require life insurance on every loan so check with your lender to determine what the requirements are . The SBA website has a loan checklist you can download . If your lender does require life insurance , you can use an existing policy assuming it meets the collateral requirements laid out by the lender or you can purchase a new policy for the exact amount of coverage required by the lender . The best idea is to check with the lender to see whats required .
There are a lot of factors to answer this question . First only cash value life insurance would be considered collateral . These are whole life , universal life , variable life and indexed universal life policies . Next the loan institution would have to approve it . Not all banks will consider life insurance as collateral . Contact the loan institution first and if they consider cash value life insurance as collateral then contact your life insurance company for an updated illustration for the exact cash value amount .
We get a lot of customers looking for short Term Life Insurance policies as collateral for loans , as required by the Small Business Administration . By assigning the life insurance policy to the SBA , the Small Business Administration is assured that they will get their money back if the borrower meets with an untimely death . Because the term is short , the cost is very reasonable . This type of request is usually on a rush basis , so we generally use a No Exam policy that has low cost choices . Please feel free to contact us any time for life insurance as collateral for your loan .
Yes - this is a fairly common question . When a person needs a business loan from a bank , the bank will usually require life insurance as collateral in case you died before paying off the loan . This is because the bank wants to get repaid for the loan . The structure of the policy will be the same as a regular life insurance policy including the beneficiary designation , so as the loan gets paid off , the difference would be paid to the beneficiary . You merely need to add a collateral assignment form when you submit your application for coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help getting the insurance in force and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can use a life insurance policy as collateral in some situations . The Small Business Administration -LRB- SBA -RRB- often requires a life insurance policy on the borrower so that they can get their loan paid by the policy in case of death of the insured . Key employee life insurance can sometimes be used as collateral for obtaining business loans . To use a life insurance policy as collateral for a loan , most lenders require that the policy be assigned to them . This is done by a collateral assignment form . The beneficiary of the policy is usually a relative of the policy owner , but the collateral assignment form allows the lender to take what is owed to them first . Then the remainder goes to the beneficiary stated .
Yes life insurance can be used as collateral and the way in which is used as collateral varies depending on intent . Some lenders require life insurance death benefit to back a loan balance , this is common for small business loans . In other cases , one can also pledge the cash surrender values in a life insurance policy as collateral to a loan . Many banks , thrifts , credit unions , and trust companies have written procedures on their requirements for pledging life insurance as collateral . Mostly that the company be an AM Best A or better rated carrier and that the loan to value ratio never exceed a certain percentage .
Yes , term life insurance can be used as collateral for some loans . Most commonly , we see people using term life insurance as collateral for loans through the SBA -LRB- Small Business Administration -RRB- . When the loan is expected to be paid off within 10 years , using a term life insurance policy is a very inexpensive way of providing collateral . Our office generally uses nonmed insurance for this type of need , so that it can be put into effect quickly .
Collateral is an asset that you own that has value and the lender is accepting in order to provide you a loan . Term life insurance hasnt any value . A collateral assignment is an additional item to induce a lender to make a loan and term life insurance can be used in this case . The term policy is assigned to the lender who has the first right over the proceeds in the event of death . This way the lender will get his money whether the assets that collateralized the loans are adequate or not . Incidentally , permanent insurance can be used as collateral because it has value .
Yes , you can use life insurance as collateral . Many lenders require purchase of Term life insurance as collateral for individuals to obtain small business loans . The insured person and lender simply sign a collateral assignment form that assigns to the lender the amount of life insurance that is needed to cover repayment of the loan . The remainder of the death benefit is paid to the beneficiary of the borrower 's choice . Sometimes business use life insurance on a key employee to obtain business expansion loans .
Depending on the type of policy you may be able to borrow from the cash value of the policy itself , or you may use the policy as collateral for a loan . Permanent life insurance policies have the ability to grow cash value - whole life is the best for this - but Term policies have no cash value and therefore are not usable as collateral for a loan . And not all banks will accept even Whole Life policies as collateral . You should check with the insurance company that your policy is with to see if there is an agreement in place where your policy may be used to secure a loan .
Ill tell you one way they can : by making them the beneficiary on your policy . Its a common mistake , and it can be costly . When men and women go into business for themselves , they often take out a bank loan to jumpstart the enterprise . Many lending institutions require life insurance to be in force on the borrower . They simply do not want to have to chase the heirs or estate custodians in case their client unfortunately dies before the loan is paid up . The question is , how can you arrange for them to get only the amount that is due on the loan at the time of death ? You may take out $ 1 million loan initially , but seven years down the road you may owe only $ 750,000 . How do you prevent them from getting the entire million dollars of benefit ? One very effective way of accomplishing this is through the use of a collateral assignment . As soon as the policy is put into force , the owner signs an agreement signing over the benefit to the lender . But , the agreement is careful to stipulate that only the outstanding amount of the loan would be payable . This is how it would work : the estate of the insured files a claim . The insurance carrier sees from their file that a collateral assignment has been executed . They then contact the lender for proof of the outstanding amount . Once that proof is provided , they are sent a check . The beneficiary gets the rest . The lender gets only what they are due , as they should . But I think you can see the trouble that could be caused if you made the lender the beneficiary . They would get the entire amount of the benefit even if they are not owed that much ! The collateral assignment is a neat little tool that is not complicated and can be executed in a day . But it goes along way towards securing your life insurance benefit for both your creditors and your beneficiaries .
There are a lot of factors to answer this question . First only cash value life insurance would be considered collateral . These are whole life , universal life , variable life and indexed universal life policies . Next the loan institution would have to approve it . Not all banks will consider life insurance as collateral . Contact the loan institution first and if they consider cash value life insurance as collateral then contact your life insurance company for an updated illustration for the exact cash value amount .
You can not borrow against Term Life Insurance to get cash from the Term policy , because there is no cash value in Term life insurance . But you can use your Term life insurance policy as collateral to get a loan in some situations . E.g. . The SBA often requires the purchase of a short term life insurance insurance policy when they issue loans . You would need to ask your lender if they are OK with collateral assignment of your policy as terms of obtaining a loan .
To use life insurance as collateral for a loan , you usually name a relative as the Primary Beneficiary , then fill out a collateral assignment form for the lender . This allows the lender to take whatever part of the death benefit that is needed to pay off your loan , and your Primary Beneficiary will receive the rest . The Small Business Administration often requests the purchase of a 10 year Term policy , so that they are assured to have their loan paid by the death benefit if you would pass away before the loan is paid off .
My colleagues have handled this pretty well actually . As has been said , there are a couple of factors and ways that Life Insurance may be used as collateral for a loan . The most common requiers the policy to be some form of permanent Life Insurance with a reportable cash value . These types of policies are certainly considered when a commercial banking institution is measuring one 's net worth and underwriting a loan application just as bank accounts or other investment holdings . However , if the loan is for business purposes , for example , if a contractor is purchasing a major piece of equipment , a condition of the loan may be the purchase of even a short term Life policy which would then be collaterally assigned to the lending institution .
If the whole life policy has a cash value you can borrow from the insurance company using your policy as collateral . the amount you can borrow can be as high as 90 % . Check with your life insurance broker to be sure . In Canada , if you borrow in excess of the adjusted cost base of the policy , it will trigger a taxable event . If / when you repay the loan you receive an adjustment you can use when you file your taxes . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral , it does not trigger a taxable event . Check with you life insurance broker , to be advised of the consequents of borrowing . If you do borrow reminder to at least pay the interest on the loan to avoid compound and putting the policy ar risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Life insurance policies are often assigned for loan protection or to fund funerals , among other things . Collateral assignment still gives you some control in your policy , but allows a lender to repay your loan from your life insurance proceeds if you should pass away before the loan is paid off . Whatever does not go to your loan repayment , goes to the beneficiary of your choice . For funerals , the assignment may also collateral assignment , but if prepaying a funeral for Medicaid spend down , it must be irrevocable .
A life insurance loan often refers to borrowing from an insurance company using the cash value of the policy as collateral . The percentage of the policy 's cash value you can borrow varies by type of policy , but can be as much as 90 % . It is important to pay the interest on the loan , otherwise the compounding could put the policy at risk of lapsing . In Canada , if you borrow in excess of the adjusted cost base of the policy , it is a taxable event . Should you repay the loan , you receive a tax credit . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral it does not trigger a taxable event . If you have further question , or feel I could be assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
An assignee for life insurance is the person or entity that would get part of the proceeds of a life insurance policy upon the death of the Insured . Life insurance is sometimes used as collateral for a loan , and a collateral assignment form is used . The assignee is the lender and the amount of the death benefit that would be received is the amount remaining on the loan .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
When Not To File A Car Insurance Claim ?
If there is no one else involved in the accident and the cost to repair the damage is within your means to pay , PAY IT out of pocket ! Do n't put marks on your insurance history unless you have to . Save your insurance for the large losses -LRB- lets hope you never have a large loss -RRB- . Too often the loss of discounts , rewards , and surcharges exceed the cost of the cost of the repair . Customers get upset out it later and wished they had asked before . Good question and my advice be sure you have insurance with a company that has an agent that you can trust to ask questions , just like this !
This is a question you should always consult with your agent when a situation arises . Your agent should be able to properly advise you on the pros and cons of filing a claim for any given situation which will provide you with enough information to make an informed decision on whether or not to file a claim .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
Generally speaking , if it is a minor physical damage loss to your car , namely somethingwhere the repair amount falls under your Comprehensive or Collision Deductible , you may want to think about not filing a claim . In all cases , however , discuss your options with your Insurance Professional . Keep in mind that if you have `` Full Glass '' coverage and/or Roadside assistance -LRB- Towing -RRB- , these are not subject to your deductible so they are worth filing . Again , your Insurance Professional is your best resource . Insurance companies review policies for both the size of claims paidand the frequency that claims are reported . Both can affect your rates down the line .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
A car insurance claim is when you request reimbursement for damages to your car . The damages could be due to fire , theft , an accident or many other items . A claim could also be filed if you were involved in an accident when persons were injured and required medical treatment . Typically , a claim is filed over the phone although additional face-to-face contact may be needed .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
I am not aware of any way for an individual to file a claim with Medicare . Medicare requires medical providers to file claims directly on your behalf and do so on a timely basis . Claims are filed electronically , adjudicated by Medicare , and then Medicare files your approved claim with your Medigap carrier via crossover .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
I am puzzled by your statement `` one can not damage their own property and submit a claim '' . What happens then if someone runs a stop sign or a red light and hits another car and the guilty party is charged with failure to yield right of way '' . This scenario probably happens once a day in every state and I was unaware that West Virginia has such out of touch insurance laws . I thought the driver could have his company , subject to the deductible , repair his car . The real question in your scenario is the school district best advised to file a claim because their Commercial policy is going to have to pay the claim on both sides of the equation , Also , the driver of the bus has no legal standing because he is driving the school district bus with the permission of the school district but the school district has the right to file or not to file
There are 2 ways to file a claim you can contact the carrier claim number that is listed on your policy or you can contact your agent that wrote your policy . I Always instruct our clients to contact us 1st that way we can document your file and make sure that your claim has been process right away and filed correctly . having to file a claim is stressful enough a good agent should be able to guide you through the process
Claim history is a big factor for insurance companies but just because you have a claim does n't mean your rate is going to increase . Several factors are used to determine a rate including the length of time you have been with an insurance company , credit , type of claim filed , amount of claim , castropheclaimsect . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover `` sudden and accidental '' losses . It is not a maintenance policy and you do not want to file small claims . Filing frequent , small claims will cause your rateto increase or your policy may be cancelled .
In most cases , you do not need to file a claim to Medicare , as doctors/hospitals are required to file these claims for you in a timely manner for Medicare-covered services and supplies . If , however , your doctor has not filed a claim , you can contact them and ask them to do so or call Medicare at 1-800-MEDICARE . If it is close to the time limit -LRB- 12 months -RRB- and your doctor has not filed the claim , you can do so using Medicare 's Patient Request for Medicare Payment Form -LRB- CMS-1490S -RRB- . WEBSITELINK
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
Make a claim when the recovery is more than a potential increase in subsequent premiums . Basically I advise against making petty claims that come close to the deductible on the policy . Many companies provide substantial discounts for being claims free . Loss of that discount should be computed . Other companies , however , lower the deductible for years without a claim . So you need to have a clear idea of the recovery you anticipate before filing a claim . If it is a liability claim , never hesitate to file the claim .
Immediately ! Call your agent or insurer and get started on that process . Claims can take a while to resolve or they can be resolved quickly . If you have a police report or evidence ready to go as soon as you file your claim , it can often get fixed faster . That said , you can usually submit your evidence after the initial filing . I 'm not aware of any company that wo n't let you submit evidence after filing your claim but there are a lot of companies out there . Long-short of it , file as soon as possible .
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Commission On A Single Premium Life Insurance Policy ?
Commissions vary by carriers , but on average the first year commission on a single premium whole life insurance policy is around 3 to 4 % on fully underwritten policies -LRB- i.e. you undergo complete medical review to determine eligibility for coverage -RRB- . For policies that are issued on a guaranteed issue basis , commissions tend to be higher averaging around 7 % and can range as high as 12-15 % .
Commissions vary by carriers , but on average the first year commission on a single premium whole life insurance policy is around 3 to 4 % on fully underwritten policies -LRB- i.e. you undergo complete medical review to determine eligibility for coverage -RRB- . For policies that are issued on a guaranteed issue basis , commissions tend to be higher averaging around 7 % and can range as high as 12-15 % .
Most life insurance policies pay a commission to the agent who sold the policy . The commission is usually a percent of the `` commissionable premium '' . The commissionable part of the premium may or may not exclude policy fees , and with universal life there is a target premium beyond which no commission is paid . The commission is usually paid within a month after the policy is placed , although some companies pay faster than others . If the insured drops the policy during the first year , some or all the commission may be charged back from the agent and returned to the life insurance company .
Life insurance brokers are paid a % of the commissionable premium of the life insurance policies they place . Each life insurance carrier and product pays differently , and agents are paid on different schedules set by the general agencies they use . For Term Life insurance , the commission is usually paid only on the first year premium , and if the policy lapses before the year ends , the broker may lose some or all of the commission . For Permanent policies and some Term policies , a small residual commission is paid to agent for years after the first year 's commission is paid . Of course , some agents work for brokers and are simply paid a salary .
When a Term policy is sold , the insurance company pays out from 50 % to over 100 % of the first year premium for commissions . With Term insurance , if there are any commissions paid after the first year , they are very small . Permanent insurance pays out a residual commission each year that the policy is in effect . It should be noted that it is not just the agent who gets the commission paid by the carrier . If there is a general agency/brokerage involved -LRB- as there usually is -RRB- , they get a cut . If the agent works for an agency or office , they will probably get a cut . So what the agent earns depends on whether he/she is independent and/or works directly with the carrier , or whether he/she is part of a team that places the policy and shares the commission .
Life insurance agents make money through commissions on the products they sell . If Term insurance , these commissions are usually paid for the first year , then sometimes there is a very small residual commission earned annually after that . If the policy is dropped in the first 6-12 months , commissions are often withdrawn back from the agent . Permanent policies usually have a small recurring commission annually , which is how many life insurance agents are able to supplement Social Security income during retirement .
Agents that are hired by an agency may be paid a salary by that agency . Agents that sell independently , or in an agency that pays according to production , get paid commission . The sale of a life insurance policy will pay the agent a commission if the policy is retained for up to a year . Some policies will pay a `` residual '' commission -LRB- much smaller than first year commission -RRB- for each year the insured person keeps the policy .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
How much commission does a life insruance agent make ? Commissions vary by type of product sold and by state sold in . There is a wide range of payouts from 0 % -LRB- yes , there are products that do n't pay a commission -RRB- to upwards of 120 % for the first year . After the first year , in many cases no further commission is earned .
Single premium life insurance involves paying one premium and no more while having life insurance coverage for life . It will be a modified endowment contract for tax purposes meaning it still has favorable tax treatment on the death benefit but annuity-like treatment on cash values . You do n't want to use single premium life if you plan to accessing cash value later . There are a wide variety of product types and different reasons to use them . A popular method within a narrow niche is to buy single premium life instead of an annuity if you are unlikely to need to access it for income in retirement as that the tax treatment and value of the asset at death will be more favorable . Another is to buy a single premium guaranteed universal life policy and fund with a single premium . The only issue is that reserving changes and low interest rates have impacted insurers so severely , this is an inefficient method of estate liquidity funding . Level pay guaranteed universal life is far better .
That 's a great question ! An insurance agent most often works off of a payment that is made to them when they sell a policy or product for the company - called a commission . These commissions can be fairly sizable , or very small , depending upon the sale . Therefore , in most cases , the earnings of the insurance agent depend entirely upon their ability to sell , and the product commission that is paid upon the sale . I believe the vast majority of agents will tailor the right product to the needs of the client , but there will unfortunately always be a few that are more interested in commission than client . You are always wise to have an idea of what it is that you want , and if you feel pressured , to ask for time to think it over . Follow your instincts . If you were considering a career as an agent , be aware that the start up period can be really lean until you 've gotten your client base built , and you may need to have another source of income , especially if you were accustomed to a steady paycheck . Once you get rolling , if you are motivated , honest , and good with your clients , you can make a very comfortable living . Anything I can do to help , I 'm happy to - feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! Most insurance agents do not work on a salary , they are paid based upon what they sell . Each type of policy pays a different amount of commission , and different companiescan pay the same agent a different amount for the same policy . The commission is a percentage of whatever your policy would cost for a year . So if the policy costs you $ 1000 for a year , and the agent receives their commission at say , 80 % , then they would receive $ 800 for selling you that policy . There may , or may not be residual money paid to the agent after that , it again depends upon the company , and the policy sold . If you need more detail , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Is there really a carrier that has the Cheapest Homeowners Insurance Premium Rates ? In order to answer this question , you would need to understand the rating structure and the goals and principles of the industry . It is the desire of each and every insurance carrier to do the following : 1 -RRB- Gain a Fair Share of the Risk 2 -RRB- Maintain Financial Reserves 3 -RRB- Provide Excellent Customer Service 4 -RRB- Stay in the Technology Forefront 5 -RRB- Adjust and Pay Out Claims quickly and fairly 6 -RRB- Show a profit each year not to exceed the State maximum allowed If any carrier offered the cheapest possible rates , the above 6 items would most probably not be accomplished . Also , carriers wish to evenly spread risk across the vast service area where they are licensed , a concentrated area of risk would defy the principle of the law of large numbers thereby subjecting the carrier to great loss should a large incident occur in that single area . Customers seek the lowest premium and most often speak to insurance agents ; between customers seeking a ` cheap ' premium and insurance salespeople hungry to sell policies for a commission gain , the principles of insurance are simply forgotten.In order to keep this issue from getting out of hand , insurance companies have underwriting departments who review each risk and take any necessary action to mitigate the risk , in some cases by issuing underwriting advisories or by issuing a notice of cancellation . In order to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; we have devised the following link which may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Sure you can . The Roth is just another way the government and Wall Street can get control of some of your wealth . The Roth has limits where other financial instruments do not , like cash value whole life insurance . You can only contribute $ 5,500 a year to a Roth if you make less than $ 181,000 a year if you 're married and less than $ 114,000 if you are single . The government and Wall Street are in the business of confiscating your wealth from you and diverting it towards their coffers . The more you defer , postpone and separate yourself from your income , the more fees and commissions Wall Street gets to collect .
Single premium life insurance is life insurance that is paid with one payment . Term life insurance can not be paid with a single premium . Single premium life insurance must be a type of Universal Life or Whole Life policy . Often , single premium life insurance is purchased on the basis of how much face amount can be purchased with the lump amount of cash that the applicant has available . Other times , the applicant has a face amount in mind and pays whatever lump sum is needed to purchase that amount .
It all depends . Life Insurance sales is a business opportunity . First , you are compensated for writing policies that get issued . If you were to go out and write 10 policies today that all got issued you would get paid . Second you can get a varying contract with the Insurance carrier . That means that some will pay 70,80 90 % of the first years premium as a commission to you . Third , depending on your contract , you can get renewals . For business that stays on the books after 13 months , you can get a commission from that too . Fourth , if you get into management you can get commissions from what your sales teams write . It is one of the few professions remaining today where you dont need a college degree to earn a six figure income . You need to learn your products , market to people who want/need your product and sell them what they need . There are many good companies you can work for to receive the training and support to build a very good career out of this .
Life insurance agents work on commissions meaning they are only paid when they finalize the sale of a policy -LRB- including the carrier receiving any necessary outstanding requirements to place the coverage in force -RRB- . The commission is generally a percentage of the first year annual premium that an insured is charged . Some agent contracts may offer residual commissions for certain types of policies . Hope that helps .
An auto insurance agent can make MILLIONS of dollars if he can sell MILLIONS of policies covering MILLIONS of automobiles ... . No , actually , like most insurance products ... an agent 's income is based on commission sales . The more policy count an agent can sell , the more commission he/she should be able to make . And now you wonder ... what commission percentage should an agent make ? Well , that depends on the deals you can work out with your companies and/or MGAs . Then , depending on your State laws ... you may or may NOT be able to charge additional fees ... but that is a completely different questions to be answered .
Life insurance agents mainly get paid by commission on the new policies they sell . There is a small commission paid for permanent policies for each year that their clients hang onto their permanent policies . Some agents are paid salaries , but their employers get the money to pay their salaries through commissions .
As a general rule of thumb . 100 % of first year premium is paid out to someone as commission . It 's not always your agent or `` salesman '' that gets it all . Many companies have several people that get a portion of the commission and your agent would only get his portion . The commission comes from the insurance company rather than from you . Even if you purchase direct without an agent , you will pay the same amount .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much Is Typical Home Insurance ?
A typical home insurance policy has several pricing points . The first is the location where the property is located . Another factor is the amount of money it would take to rebuild the same structure . Other factors include the amount of liability protection desired and the claims history of the applicant and the home . It is wise to get a quote on homeowners insurance prior to purchasing a home . Occasionally there are reasons that the home doesnt qualify for standard insurance . That could increase the cost of home ownership .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
There are several factors that would determine how long it would take to get a home insurance . The first consideration would be the type of construction -LRB- brick , log , vinyl siding , etc -RRB- & how far is the closest fire hydrant and how far away is the fire department . The condition of the home would also be considered ... is it in need of repair or well maintained ? Is your credit good and have you filed claims in the past on other properties . Typically , most insurance companies have access to a large data base that keep info . There are some other factors as wellthat would be considered . Finally , some agents will have binding authority if the home is not high in value . In which case , you could get coverage on the home the same day it was quoted .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
Home insurance is written for homes . Homes are never typical . It is the uniqueness that makes home ownership attractive . A homeowners policy is based upon the value of the home , the location of the home , the fire protection available , the age of the home and the condition of the home . In addition there are other items of interest that will guide an underwriter to evaluate the risk of your home
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
If you have a `` hospitalization '' policy which may also be referred to as Health Insurance coverage all the policies typically has a section in which they state how much they pay for a semi-private room , ICU , and NICU . This type of policy alos provides coverage for all other services that would covered while an inpatient at the hospital . These coverages are typically stated like `` so much per day '' or `` at a % of total charges . There are `` indemnity policies '' that pay an charge for the room which is typically chosen by the applicant at the time of applying for the coverage . There is another policy referred to as a `` critical care policy '' which is also an indemnity type policy that states they pay some flat amount for a given number of days if you are an inpatient in the hospital .
If you were to hire workers to provide all the services that a stay at home mom performs each day , the cost would be staggering . So it is important not to underestimate how much life insurance to purchase on a stay at home mother or father . However , with most life insurance companies , the stay at home parent will only be able to purchase the amount of coverage that is on their `` working outside the home '' partner . Therefore , when you look at how much insurance to purchase for your family , you will need to look at the whole picture . Most people buy enough life insurance to replace at least 5-10 years of income , or financial value , as in the case of a stay at home mom or dad .
How much home insurance do you want ? Do you want a policy for a home loan closing that meets the lender 's miniumum requirements ? Do you want to insure a home for what its market value is ? Do you want to insure your home for what it will cost to rebuild it and the necessary costs for debris removal , architectural fees , permits , building code upgrades ? The bottom line is that a homeowners policy produced for a mortgage closing is a minor detail but a homeowners policy when your home is damaged is EVERYTHING . A conversation with an insurance professional will cover these topics relative to your wants to determine just how much coverage you need .
How much is the average renter 's insurance premium ? Not much ! Renter 's insurance typically is inexpensive and costs about $ 100 - $ 240 per year , depending on where you live and how much contentcoverageyou need . Of course , there are many other variables including other types of insurance you have with the carrier , your credit and past claims history .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How To Plan For Retirement In Your 60s ?
If by planning in your sixties you mean start planning , then you 're working until age 70 , not taking Social Security until age 70 and and required minimum distributions at age 701/2 . If you mean you 're ready to retire , do the same for maximum income with Social Security and more money to set aside for retirement by working longer . The # 1 risk to retirement is human longevity . You 'll need the extra money .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Hahah ! I like Brandi Jo 's answer above best ! But the answer to your question , `` Should I convert to Whole Life and When ? '' depends on a number of things . Will you be retiring at 60 or are you retired now ? How much liquidity do you have now ? Will you have a need for insurance when you turn 60 ? So the answer to your question depends on your goals and needs for insurance . You should talk with an insurance adviser . Personally I think you should 've started with Whole Life , but that not being the case if you are going to convert your term policy you should do it immediately .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Suprisingly , far more than you might think . This is a large portion of my practice providing insurance to the 60 plus crowd who have come to me seeking insurance for another 20-50 years . I know many bought into programs offered by the most recent -LRB- yes , they come and go over time -RRB- financial advisors on TV and radio -LRB- ever wonder why they classify themselves as entertainers ? -RRB- whose advice works if nothing goes wrong . Well , how many times does everything work just exactly right ? This is why it is hard to find all these 60 plus year olds through time who have been successful following these programs ... Things change , mortgages are n't paid off , kids and grand kids become responsibilities for grand parents , the pension plan 's best offer is all or nothing and you need life insurance to swing the deal ... So while not every 60 year old needs life insurance , the number of 60 plus people who need life insurance is far greater than those who do n't .
The best life insurance for a 60 year depends on what you are using it for , as it does with a person of any age . E.g. . If you need it to pay off your mortgage , term insurance could work . However , at age 60 , you do have to pay greater consideration to how long you want to have life insurance . If your goal is to have it be in effect upon your death at any age , you are safest getting a permanent policy . Why ? Because you may not qualify for a new policy when term insurance ends , and many policies are not convertible to permanent insurance past age 65 or 70 . There are many excellent No Exam Whole Life policies available at age 60 , with maximum face amounts of $ 25,000 or so . You can also buy larger policies if you have relatively good health and do n't mind taking an exam . I think Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee is a good choice at age 60 . Using an agency that offers many Senior options will help you make the best choice .
Does a 60 year old need life insurance ? To answer this question a person must find a 60 year old and ask do you need life insurance ? To get to that answer maybe a few others questions would be necessary to ask , such as ... Do you still have a mortgage ? are you married ? Do you have a pension and want to take the full benefit ? Does anybody in your family still depend on you ? Do you want your wife or your kids to suffer when you pass ? Did all your plans for retirement work out exactly as you 've planned ? Still a ton of questions to ask . Most of my business is based on 60 + year olds discovering they need life insurance .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
Most disability plans are set up to pay 60 % of gross pay but some plans can go higher depending on your age and occupation . Long term disability plans usually have a Social Security offset so the amount you receive from the policy may be less than 60 % but when added to SS your total monthly should be 60 % of gross .
A qualified beneficiary must notify the plan administrator of a qualifying event within 60 days after divorce or legal separation or a child 's ceasing to be covered as a dependent under plan rules . Plan participants and beneficiaries generally must be sent an election notice not later than 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred . The individual then has 60 days to decide whether to elect COBRA continuation coverage . The person has 45 days after electing coverage to pay the initial premium . Qualified beneficiaries must be given an election period during which each qualified beneficiary may choose whether to elect COBRA coverage . Each qualified beneficiary may independently elect COBRA coverage . A covered employee or the covered employee 's spouse may elect COBRA coverage on behalf of all other qualified beneficiaries . A parent or legal guardian may elect on behalf of a minor child . Qualified beneficiaries must be given at least 60 days for the election . This period is measured from the later of the coverage loss date or the date the COBRA election notice is provided by the employer or plan administrator . The election notice must be provided in person or by first class mail within 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred .
Inpatient hospital care is covered by Medicare Part A. Medicare only covers 90 consecutive days of hospitalization . After 90 days Medicare provides 60 lifetime reserve days and there is a co-pay of $ 644 per day for days 91-150 of hospitalization . Anytime you have been out of the hospital for 60 consecutive days and new benefit period of 90 days starts all over again . That is why it is highly unlikely you ever will use up your 60 lifetime reserve days . If you have a Medicare Supplement it will pay the $ 644 co-pay for days 91-150 and if you did use up your 60 lifetime reserve days your Medicare Supplement will provide you with an additional 365 lifetime reserve days .
Most retirement advisers recommend purchasing long term care insurance at 50 years of age , but the actual and more popular age is 60 . A non-smoking married couple age 60 and in good health purchasing maximum benefits with an inflation rider are going to spend $ 300 a month . Considering that seniors spend $ 250,000 during their retirement for medical bills and extended care , thats seems reasonable .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
You should purchase long term care for your retirement years . The statistics are significant that youll experience a need for assisted living or perhaps nursing home confinement . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 on medical and extended care during their retirement years . Securing long term care is important , especially when youre healthy and heading into your late fifties , early sixties . Most married couples who purchase long term care in their early 60s are opting to purchase the maximum benefit with at least a 3 % inflation rider . The total benefits generally run $ 7,000 a calendar month with max benefits of around $ 400,000 to $ 420,000 for two 60 year old non-smokers on a joint policy .
You Should Buy Long Term Care Insurance when youre young and in good health . But most Americans under the age of 50 consider it too early in their life for consideration because of other more pressing midlife financial events or commitments to come . The general rule of thumb is age 50 , but most purchase at age 60 . A 60 year old nonsmoking male and female in good health will pay $ 300 a month for a long term care insurance policy . Long term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- is part of retirement planning . The total medical cost during retirement is $ 250,000 . Some of that expense could be LTCi assisted living or nursing home care . If you have discretionary dollars , it is recommended to purchase an LTCi policy to the maximum allowable benefits before age 65 .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Do You Need Long Term Disability Insurance ?
That depends on how long you could live without your paycheck . Long term disability insurance is designed to replace a portion of your income if you were to become sick or injured and could no longer work . Consider how much your ability to make an income is worth . If you make $ 50,000 per year and assuming you never got another raise and were planning on working for 30 more years , your income would be worth $ 1,500,000 -LRB- $ 50,000 X 30 -RRB- . This about it this way ... if your car is worth $ 15,000 and lets assume you pay $ 100 per month for car insurance . If your income is worth $ 1,500,000 , does n't it make sense to pay $ 100 per month for a long term disability policy to protect that ?
Do you need long term disability ? Well it will depend on what you have saved and set aside for yourself . Having assets that you are willing to liquidate allows you to push the need for long term care back and will lower the premium . The need is going to be based on what you have , what you need and what standard of living you want to maintain if you become disabled .
If you can not live for more than a few months without your paycheck , you need long term disability insurance . Becoming disabled , even for several months , is a traumatic experience . It affects you physically and emotionally . Being faced with financial hardship on top of that can be devastating . Disability insurance pays you income while you are disabled , in cash , so you can use it where it is needed . Nothing is more valuable than that when you are hurting and unable to pay your bills , aside from getting better and the support of those around you .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
If you do not have an estate to protect then you may not need Long Term Care . If you can qualify for Medicaid or a Medicaid waiver program then you do not need long term care . If you do not mind spending down all you have worked for during your life to go on Medicaid then you do not need long term care . If you have an estate you want to pass to your heirs , loved ones you want to protect from the burdens of caring for you when you become sick and can no longer care for yourself then you do need long term care insurance . If you want choices on where you are cared for then you need long term care .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
The time to get Long Term Disability Insurance is when you have a full time job and do not have Long Term Disability Insurance -LRB- or enough Long Term Disability Insurance -RRB- provided by your employer . Disability can hit at any age , and the need for income is no respecter of age . So there is no bad time to buy Long Term Disability Insurance .
No these are two totally separate types of insurance plans used to cover totally different needs . Disability insurance can be either long term or short term . Long term disability is used to replace your income for the rest of your working life . It usually has a bit longer elimination period 90-180-360 days before benefits begin to pay . The benefits can pay as long as age 67 when social security benefits start . A short term disability insurance plan pays benefits sooner within days , but only lasts a few months or up to a couple of years . Both disability insurance plans are insuring most peoples most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . Disability insurance should be purchased when a person starts working for a living . Long term care insurance is meant to cover a person that can no longer care for themselves . The person needs home health care , assisted living or a nursing home . Usually the time to purchase a long term care policy is when a person gets older , typically in their 50s or 60s , but some wait until their 70s . It really depends more upon their health and lifestyle . Just do n't wait until you have been diagnosed with an affliction , then is too late .
Nope . Long-term care insurance provides financial protection against the cost of having assistance with your daily life . For example , someone living in an assisted living facility or a nursing home has long-term care that is needed because without the assistance of others , they would not be able to live comfortably and would face difficulty getting around and taking care of themselves . Long-term care is typically most utilized by elder and retired persons . Long-term disability insurance refers to providing an income to you in the event you develop a disability that inhibits your ability to work in your field -LRB- make sure to check the definition of disability in your policy to see what qualifies as a disability - this can vary by company -RRB- . For example , if you 're a surgeon and develop a condition that affects your ability to perform surgery , that condition would affect your ability to earn an income in your field . To protect against the loss of income , a long-term disability policy would provide an income to you while you recover or transition to another occupation - again , this is where the `` definition of disability '' is critical . If you need assistance with your coverage , please feel free to send me an e-mail via the contact me button or give me a call . I 'm happy to help and there are no fees for my assistance . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
Under your current situation I would not carry the old disability policy . Disability insurance is a coordinated product in the sense that any number of policies will not pay more than the maximum scheduled amount usually no greater than 70 % The only reason to carry two different disability insurance policies is if you purchase a short term and a long term disability insurance policy . The long term policy may have an extended elimination period of 90 days or 180 days before benefits commence . A short term disability plan can commence within in days and pay benefits up to the elimination period of the long term plan . What you are describing sounds like two long term disability plan and would not make financial sense to keep the other policy .
Long term disability insurance pays you a large portion of your paycheck if you are unable to work due to a long term illness or injury . If you or your dependents rely on your paycheck to pay essential bills , and do not have enough in savings to tide you over for over 6 months , you have a need for long term disability insurance . A long term DI policy can provide income to you for many years , even a lifetime . Becoming disabled , either temporarily or permanently , is a much more common an occurrence than most people think . Having long term disability insurance can protect you and your family from some of the trauma , if such a misfortune should happen to you .
If you have to choose between buying short or long term disability insurance , most people select long term disability insurance . That is because most people can survive a few months of not having an income , but it is difficult for most people to go without their paycheck for many months or years . If you are trying to decide whether to buy any disability insurance at all , it depends on your income -LRB- whether your family depends on it -RRB- , your health and occupation -LRB- whether you qualify for a policy -RRB- , and the cost of the policy -LRB- whether you can afford it -RRB- . If you are living on minimum wage , buying long term disability insurance is not going to fit in your budget . If you are the breadwinner in your family , do n't have a large amount of savings , and have a moderate to good standard of living , it is almost essential to do long term disability insurance .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Weight Affect Health Insurance Premiums ?
Health insurance companies currently evaluate your height and weight and calculate your BMI -LRB- body metric index -RRB- to get an idea of your overall health . I have had clients that have had to pay a surcharge -LRB- additional premium -RRB- due to being overweight and several declined due to morbid obesity . I even had a client declined for being underweight . Excessive weight can lead to numerous physical and medical conditions . Some chronic , some life threatening . There is no such thing as a healthy fat person .
Being overweight affects life insurance differently , depending on what type of policy you are getting . If you are getting a No Exam policy that gives you a set rate just for qualifying , then your weight will not make a difference , just as long as you do not weigh over the maximum amount . Some policies have no weight limit at all . If you are applying for a policy that does require medical underwriting , fluctuations of just a few pounds can cause your rate to go up . If you start out just slightly overweight , this increase may not make a lot of difference , or you may even find one company that will rate you much lower than the rest . But if you are quite overweight , the price increase can be large , or you can even be declined . Weight is one of those areas where it really helps to shop around . Not only do different companies have different weight charts , but sometimes going with a No Exam policy can beat the price of one requiring an exam , when the applicant is overweight or obese . Using an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance can certainly help save time , money and frustration .
Life insurance insurance rates are determined by a very complex equation that the insurance carrier has developed . Some the things that will be taken into consideration in this equation will be your height , weight , your habits , your medical history and your families medical history . Your weight is only part of the whole equation depending on how far outside of the federal height and weight guidelines for your sex will determine how much your weight will affect your rate . Getting a rate for coverage is typically free and I would recommend contacting a local agent to discuss coverage availability and pricing .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
If applying for No Exam life insurance , BMI is not taken into consideration for approval . And when one 's weight is within the normal weight range , BMI will not affect ones ' rating for medically underwritten life insurance , either . It is when someone is overweight that the BMI is looked at in medically underwritten life insurance , to determine whether to give a better or worse rating than one might get based on weight alone .
A medical exam for the coverage typically consists of a paramedical exam -LRB- height/weight check and vitals checks such as pulse and blood pressure readings -RRB- , a blood test , and a urine test - sometimes an EKG and/or cognitive testing may be required for older age individuals -RRB- . Even if it 's not asked specifically on the application itself , the carrier will see the input regarding the wls -LRB- I 'm assuming stands for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- surgery in the APS from your doctor . For any fully underwritten life insurance program , the carrier will request a copy of an APS from your doctor , in addition to the completion of a medical exam conducted for the insurance policy -RRB- . An APS is an Attending Physician Statement - in short , it 's a doctor 's summary of your medical history records . For example , if you were being treated for diabetes , it would cite your A1C reading history , prescriptions prescribed for the condition , when it was diagnosed , etc. . In the APS , the carrier will see in the doctor 's notes that you have discussed getting the wls surgery -LRB- I 'm assuming that `` wls '' is supposed to stand for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- and ask if a surgery has been scheduled and/or completed . If it has n't been completed yet , a carrier will postpone approving you for the coverage because you have an outstanding medical procedure on the books that 's still supposed to get done . From a carrier 's perspective , their risk of a claim is greatly increased when they know a surgical operation is upcoming as complications can always occur during any surgery . Please note , after a weight loss surgery procedure and you 've ideally lost a large amount of weight and want to apply for coverage , part of that weight loss can be added in to a carrier 's calculation of height/weight profile . The reason for this is quick weight loss for people -LRB- whether via surgery , diet and exercise , liposuction , etc. -RRB- can often result in some individuals gaining a percentage of that weight back - unfortunately not everyone always keeps all of the pounds off . So if you apply for coverage within 12 months of that rapid weight loss , a carrier may add half the weight loss amount back to your total . For example , if you weight 300 pounds and loss 120 pounds after a procedure , now you 're sitting at 180 pounds . If you applied for coverage soon after having lost that 120 pounds , the carrier would add 60 back to your total and base the underwriting on a height/weight profile of 240 pounds -LRB- 180 +60 -RRB- . The purpose of the 12 month differential is to show stability in the person 's weight loss and that they have a good chance of keeping off the weight . Please also note , alternative options will still result in the same outcome -LRB- e.g. non-medical life insurance -RRB- because a question on almost every application will ask in some format `` are there any outstanding tests or other medical procedures outstanding or waiting to be completed '' . You would only be able to secure a graded policy with a low face amount -LRB- $ 25k or $ 50k maximum -RRB- , which does not appear to be in the ballpark of the coverage you 're looking to secure -LRB- you noted $ 900k in your question 's statement -RRB- . If you have a policy already in force , you can elect to convert all or a portion of it to permanent coverage . The conversion would keep the risk class that the original policy had and would simply just calculate the rates based on your age . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies are all about risk . If you have a lot of tickets , or accidents , your auto insurance rates will be high . If your home is in an area wherehurricanes are common , your homeowners will be high.Likewise , if you are obese , you are much more likely to develop weight related diseases that can affect your life expectancy . Diabetes , high blood pressure , strokes and heart disease are found more often with people that have issues with their weight . Being too thin carries similar risks . Many insurers will have a set standard for your weight and height that they will use to help determine that risk . They will use that to help determine your rate . The less risk there is that you will pass away sooner than later , the lower your rate will be . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
The type , age , model year etc. of aa car may certainly affect the amount of premium a company charges to insure it . A new car for example , will usually cost more to insure than an older car in part because if the value of the car itself . Likewise , the type and weight of a vehcle may make a difference as well . Insuring a Dodge Ram pickup fr example will cost more in liability premium than a Hyudai Sonata because a pickup can cause more damage and potential injury because of it 's increased mass and weight . An insurance compoany uses many different factors in order to develop what they believe is the proper premium to reflect the risk that they are asked to insure .
Pregnancy can affect life insurance rates due to the applicant 's weight or if there are some complications such as gestational diabetes . If in the third trimester or if there are serious complications , the policy will usually be postponed until after the baby is born . Not all companies will issue a policy during pregnancy , but aside from those things , pregnancy does not affect rates with some companies .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
Medicare will pay for weight loss surgery if the BMI is over 35 , if there is a health condition related to obesity that will be cured or alleviated by losing weight through the weight loss surgery , if weight loss must occur before treatment can be effectively undertaken for another health problem , and if other treatments are not expected to work to produce sufficient weight loss . There is a psychological evaluation done prior to surgery to make sure it should be done .
It sounds like you have a decision to make : A. postpone or cancel your elective weight loss surgery so that you can get the life insurance now , or B.postpone getting life insurance until after you have your weight loss surgery . If you have found a policy for which you qualify weight wise , are not suffering health complications from your weight , and need $ 900,000 of coverage for a loan or other reason , you could probably qualify by simply postponing your surgery for a year . Of course , if your health is at risk , getting the surgery can not only help your health , but improve your life insurance rates in the future .
The cost of Term life insurance is affected by the age , health , weight , and smoking status , as well as the length of the Term policy they are applying for . The very best health class for a 30 year old man will cost about 3/4 of what it would if he was rated Standard , and the premium for a 10 year Term policy could cost about half of what a 30 year policy would cost . Free quote engines on the internet providing instant quotes can allow you to put in your information and see what the different options could cost at different health classes .
You most certainly can , unless your weight not only affects your health , but is so obese that it affects your ability to get around . It will affect the rate you pay however . In the worst case , you may be limited to guaranteed issue policies . The critical factor is how is it affecting the rest of your health ? Gary Lane . Thank you .
Medicare will cover weight loss programs when weight has a direct impact on health . Some health conditions that may be alleviated by weight loss are sleep apnea , hypertension , joint pain , and diabetes type 2 . Medicare will pay for 3 hours of weight management counseling the first year and two hours of counseling each year after that . If further treatment is needed , Medicare can provide more , including gastric bypass surgery , if needed .
Truly depends on your state -LRB- or zip code -RRB- , your age , height and weight -LRB- with some companies -RRB- and if a smoker . The price is also affected by the insurance company 's pool of people -LRB- insureds -RRB- and their claims . Often , plans with a sicker pool of people will have a higher premium . Insurance companies with fewer underwriting questions , tend to have a sicker pool , thus higher rates . Marketing budgets will also effect premiums . If you see a plan advertised heavily , it will be reflected in the rates . Companies with a more strict underwriting guidelines will have a health pool of people and rates will tend to be lower .
Regardless of the brand of insurance you apply for the premium you pay will be determined by several factors . Your age , height-weight , health history , gender , tobacco use , etc. are all things that will affect your premium . How much coverage you want and how long you want to be covered are big factors too . Do you want coverage until the day you die regardless of how long you live ? That would mean you want whole life . Or do you want coverage for only a few years until the kids are raised and your debts are paid off ? That would mean term life insurance and you can buy that much cheaper . If you want the best premium , do n't search for any one brand or company . Compare rates for many companies using a quoter such as WEBSITELINK
Yes , most people can get life insurance if they are overweight . Some things that might create a difficulty are if they also have a serious health condition such as uncontrolled diabetes or recent heart attack , or if their weight is in the morbidly obese category . However , there are many policies with lenient weight limits , and there is at least one policy in almost every state that does not have any weight limit at all . Some of these will work for persons with health conditions , as well , and some of them will even pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one -LRB- are not graded -RRB- . You need to work with agencies that carry a variety of policies like this so that you can get the most affordable overweight life insurance premium .
Yes , most people can get some type of life insurance policy if overweight , even if you are morbidly obese -LRB- do n't you hate that label -RRB- . There are a handful of companies that will provide first day coverage -LRB- no graded period -RRB- without any weight requirement at all . Most policies that disregard weight will have a graded period , where the death benefit paid during the first couple of years would be reduced for death due to natural causes . Some simplified issue polices -LRB- no exam needed -RRB- have very liberal weight charts . These can be a good choice , especially if you have not had your blood tested for a while . There are also some fully underwritten policies that have much more lenient weight charts than others . If you are applying for a large policy , certain companies can save you thousands of dollars . Be sure to contact an impaired risk or overweight life insurance expert for your life insurance if you are significantly overweight . Not only do you need a variety of choices , you need the experience of someone who knows how to maneuver the factors involved : weight changes over the past year , health conditions that can be associated with build , etc. .
Your weight is a significant aspect in the underwriting process . Too heavy a build can mean higher rates or an outright decline for a person seeking the best possible rates for themselves . What you have to understand about underwriting is an underwriter has to make a `` guess '' based on your information one time . They can not track your health over time and adjust cost as the policy goes . The problem with excess weight is it can be traced to other health conditions which lower life expectancy , which either drives up cost or leads to a decline . An insured can however after a year or so , ask for the insurance company to reconsider their rating if they have lost weight and can show some consistency in maintaining the weight loss .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Does Auto Insurance Agent Make Per Policy ?
Well it all depends on the company they work for . But most agents make a small amount of money selling an auto policy . They count on the Renewals to run there agency . you can always ask your agent how much he will make selling your auto insurance . But typically its betten % 5 - % 10 of the policy premium .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
That depends on how long you could live without your paycheck . Long term disability insurance is designed to replace a portion of your income if you were to become sick or injured and could no longer work . Consider how much your ability to make an income is worth . If you make $ 50,000 per year and assuming you never got another raise and were planning on working for 30 more years , your income would be worth $ 1,500,000 -LRB- $ 50,000 X 30 -RRB- . This about it this way ... if your car is worth $ 15,000 and lets assume you pay $ 100 per month for car insurance . If your income is worth $ 1,500,000 , does n't it make sense to pay $ 100 per month for a long term disability policy to protect that ?
The average life insurance agent makes around $ 40,000 per year . But selling life insurance is like owning your own business . There is no limit and there is no safety net at the bottom either . Most people who get into life insurance never make it past one year . A very few make a whole lot of money . How much one person makes has nothing to do with how much another person will make .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
You can take a defensive driving course and get a discount on your auto . It can vary based on what state you live in . You can take a look at your deductibles as well . You may have a very low deductible and not even realize it . You should make sure how much you use your vehicle is how it is listed on the policy . Many insurance companies choose rate based on how long you commute to work and / or how many miles you drive the vehicle per year . That can change throughout the years so make sure that is up to date on your policy
Disability Income Insurance evaluates health factors , so the cost of the policy will depend on how the applicant is rated health wise . If a nonsmoker who is of normal weight and has no health history , Preferred ratings can be given . The price also depends on the risk of the occupation , how much income the applicant makes -LRB- and how much of that income they want to replace in case of disability -RRB- , and what bells and whistles they want on their policy . For a 40 year old male office worker who makes $ 60,000 per year , the price can be as good as $ 50 per month for a plan that will last to age 65 .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
There are a few agents making 7 figures . Many more struggling below $ 50,000 . How much you can make will of course vary by factors like your drive , market focus and skill . Less now than in the past but where you live and work could have a big impact on how much you make . The internet has changed that some . Your gross income is also going to be different than your net income depending on your business model . Some agents rely on purchased leads some rely on a heavy internet presents . Both methods have high cost . Others may call or door knock a list which is going to have minimal cost . Many established agents have a large client base that they service and get referrals from . So while an agent may have a large gross income , depending on business cost , that agent could very easily net much less than the guy with a much smaller gross .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
You can have two auto policies but not on the same car . I have many clients that own small business and they have a business auto policy and a personal auto policy which then gives them a multi policy discount on the personal auto and cost them much less per auto and the business auto they use the insurance premium as a business expense on their taxes .
I love this question . I have been a Life Insurance agent for close to 30 years and I have no clue . I see commercials that say `` Only 1 $ per unit '' Or `` Only $ 1 per unit per day '' Call the 800 # and you get the `` well it depends ... '' If they do not know how is the public supposed to know ? As an agent it can mean $ 1,000 of base coverage or it can mean $ 1,000 , $ 5,000 or even $ 10,000 in child rider . The majority of Life Insurance is sold `` per $ 1,000 '' The cost per thousand is determined by many factors such as age , sex , health and type and amount of coverage . While it is easy to use a calculator to come up with a monthly quote . It takes an experienced agent to come up with a quote that truly represents what you may qualify for . Not some low ball cost per unit .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
`` Life insurance per unit '' is the cost of life insurance per thousand dollars of coverage . Child Riders are priced per unit . E.g. a $ 10,000 child rider may cost $ 60 per year , or $ 6.00 per unit . Flat extras are also charged by unit . The insurance company may add on $ 7.50 per unit of life insurance for 3 years after having surgery for prostate cancer . For a $ 100,000 policy , that would add on $ 750 per year , but then the flat extra would drop off after three years and the policy would cost $ 750 less . You can also price your own policy if you know the cost of one unit of life insurance . E.g. . If you are buying a final expense policy that costs $ 50 per unit , a $ 10,000 policy will cost $ 500 per year .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To Sue Someone With No Auto Insurance ?
While this isnt a legal corner you can probably approach this in one of two ways . You can file a claim with your insurance carrier , particularly if you have comprehensive and collision coverage . They will settle your claim and then pursue the other party . The other way would be to hire an attorney and file a lawsuit . Perhaps it could be handled in small claims but being without insurance doesnt absolve the other driver from responsibility .
You can not sue someone for not having auto insurance . You can sue a person if the persons or party caused bodily injury and/or property damage to you . Auto insurance would normally cover the persons or party in this situation which is why you would carry auto insurance in the first place . However if the persons or party does not have the coverage you may take them to court to seek restitution . But you can not sue the persons or party just for not having auto insurance .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
You can be sued by an auto insurance company . If you are involved in an accident and determined to be at fault but do not have any or enough insurance to cover the claims , the company can sue you for the amount paid to their client . A company could also sue if a claim was paid to you and it was later determined to have been overpaid or fraud . The company can sue to get the money that should not have been paid .
Yes and auto insurance carrier at their discretion can bring a law suit against you . Auto insurance companies only sue to recover their loss and no more . So for example you caused an accident and they person you hit used his or her insurance to pay for the damage to their car because you had no insurance . The insurance company may want to recover what they paid out since their client was not at fault . Therefore the insurance company could take you to court to recover the monies spent for the repairs . No lets take it a step further . Say you were the one who was hit and were also injured . Your insurance company if they did not pay for your injuries will not sue for injury , pain and suffering and so on since the insurance company did not suffer a loss in this area . Again , insurance companies will only try to recover their own loss .
Even if someone has car insurance , if you choose to sue them you have to file in small claims court unless this is a much larger claim . I would reach out to an attorney to get more details . When someone has insurance , usually that company will give you a settlement however sometimes what they offer is not what you can get or should be awarded which you end up in court anyway . There are some great attorneys that specialize in accidents . I do not know what state you are in so I can not make a recommendation but just do some homework . Get someone that is reputable . Good Luck .
Renter 's Insurance normally includes Liability Insurance coverage , which would pay for acts of a pet . There are some policies with sub-limits for acts of pets -LRB- means they pay less than your regular liability limit if a pet causes someone to sue you -RRB- , and some with exclusions for acts of pets , so it really depends on your policy . Keep in mind that if your dog bites someone , your insurance will normally cancel the policy if you keep the pet as they believe that a dog who has bitten before will likely bite again . I do n't necessarily agree with that logic but I have seen a lot of families have to put a pet to sleep because it has bitten someone - either due to insurance requirements or law enforcement requirements .
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
This one is really dependent upon the circumstances and where you live . I can only speak to how Michigan will treat it . Since we 're a No-Fault state , if your car is damaged , your insurance will cover the damage to your car -LRB- if you have physical damage coverage -RRB- . If you do n't carry physical damage coverage you can sue for up to $ 1,000 in small claims court . Now , most people in Michigan have coverage for this under their policies and will pay it out without going to court . You simply contact their company , explain the circumstances and submit a police report showing their driver is at fault . They usually pay these very quickly . If it 's not for physical damage to a car , you may be able to do the same thing , but the outcome may be very different . If it 's for property damage or an injury , they may or may not work with you . It 's very possible you may have to sue the other driver to recover any damages . Remember , their insurance company represents their driver , not you . I would advise my clients to get an estimate on any damage to a car and to consult a doctor with any injury . Then , depending on what you find out , make a determination on whether it 's worth pursuing . Any time you sue , there 's a lot of time and energy involved and the outcome is not certain . You need to be able to put a dollar amount on it before you proceed . Get your ducks in a row first , then you 'll be in a much better position .
A homeowners policy is a legal contract . That contract may include a provision that says that you can not sue the company but must arbitrate . You should consult with an attorney . In most states you would still be free to sue . You would basically sue the company for not performing their obligations under the contract .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
If you are sued or someone threatens to sue you , notify your agent or call the toll free number listed in your renters policy . If you realize that you have suffered a loss of personal property contact your insurance agent and discuss the potential effect of the claim on future premiums and the amount that you can reasonably expect to recover from the claim . Then notify the claims department . The claims department will take statements and may send someone to look at the loss . They will adjust the claim as quickly as possible .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
There are two main things you get with any fire insurance policy : property protection and liability protection . You will get both of these with a renters insurance policy . The property protection should be enough to cover all of YOUR personal belongings , but not so much that you are over insured . This should NOT include the cost of the building , or anything internal that belongs to your landlord , as they must cover that with their insurance . The liability coverage should be enough to protect you in case someone is injured . The liability coverage typically starts at $ 100,000 and goes up from there . You should pick an amount that will cover you in the unfortunate event that someone is injured and sues you .
Minimum coverage is applied different in every State . In Oregon you are required to carry Liability coverage with a minimum bodily injury/property damage limit at $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 / $ 20000 . This is the minimum coverage to drive legally in the State of Oregon . Your lienholder might have other requirements to protect their investment , and require you to carry comprehensive and collision coverage as well . I always ask clients if you carry the minimum coverage of $ 25,000 and injure someone in an auto accident . Would you be able to pay the difference if they sue you for $ 100,000 . If the answer is no , then you should consider increasing your liability limits . In the State of Oregon you can not file bankruptcy on a judgement from and accident and the difference is normaly paid through wage garnishments and judgements.Its well worth the extra money for the extra protection .
You should ask yourself , How much can I afford to lose ? That will give you a simple answer . However , most buyers of tenants insurance fail to recognize the problem of legal liability . If someone is injured while on your rented property , they will potentially sue you . The cost of defending a suit and paying the judgment could easily force a person into bankruptcy . While the personal property is important coverage for liability is even more important . So , buy what you need and take the highest liability option available .
Yes . The companies that rent out their dwellings have landlord policies . Those policies usually only cover damage to the structure from outside sources and not from the tenants . If you 're responsible for a stray candle or a stove fire which burns the house , condominium , or apartment complex down , you 'll be sued to cover those damages . Renters insurance provides liability coverage for just that situation . That liability coverage also protects you if someone gets hurt over at your place , if someone sues you because they think you said something wrong , or even if your animal attacks them . Renters insurance is also the insurance that you would need should your personal property get stolen or damaged in a loss like fire . So yes , it is legal to require renters insurance in Arizona . The good news is that it 's not only a really good option to have , but it 's also extremely affordable . If you want , we can even draft up a quote for you . Please reach out to us at www.insuranceeddie.com . Thank you .
As I illustrated recently to a class of high school freshmen , that is really a complicated question but let me clarify full-coverage first . Insurance agents only use that term when someone else introduces the subject . We know that full-coverage does not mean that the insurance company will make everything right all the time . Policies have limits , claims are adjusted and there are a great many places where there could be misunderstandings . An insurance policy has two major sections , liability and property damage . Many people think that if they have coverage in both sections they have full-coverage . If they cause an accident and people are injured , they might well be sued . The liability portion of the policy will stand between them and the injured party until the judgments and expenses exceed the liability limits written in their policy . These limits can range from $ 15,000 to over $ 1 million . So if someone is injured and sues and wins a judgment in the amount of $ 50,000 , your full-coverage policy might not meet your needs and the court might be looking at your other assets to satisfy the judgment . A similar disagreement can arise with property damage . This is settled on actual cash value , unless you have a rare policy with agreed value coverage . There are two problems which present themselves . You might really love your little Ford Focus that you bought two years ago and when it is damaged disagree with the adjuster on the value of the car . When the car is inspected the adjuster may decide that the car can not be repaired economically . The adjusted value presented will probably be less than you expected because there is a deductible which will be taken out of the settlement . Again , your full-coverage policy may not cover you in the way that you want . However , you asked about cost and in California the cost is dependent on the year , make and model of the vehicle , where the vehicle is registered , the driving record of the members of the household , the annual mileage of the vehicle , and then the coverages that you select . Companies offer discounts and sometimes assess penalties based on driving histories , other types of coverage , the occupation of the principal operator and other factors . The answer to how much it costs is , it depends .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How To Choose A Homeowners Insurance ?
That is a great question ! The best way to choose a policy is to do two things : Your homework , and the legwork . Ask around family and friends and see what they did , or did n't do when choosing theirs . If a family member has a similar sized home , ask what their policy covers , and costs . Have a good idea what the value of your things are - have serial numbers , models and makes , even pictures of things to establish value . Get comparable prices . List everything - clothes , appliances , lamps , everything that you would have to replace . Some companies , like State farm , will have a program that can help you do this , and store the information for you . Then do the legwork - find a good agent , and compare prices . Talk about deductibles , and replacement value . When you are comfortable , then buy . If you need help , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
The most important step in choosing a homeowners policy is to select a trusted insurance agent . If you dont have such an agent seek recommendations from friends , colleagues and neighbors . A trusted agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . Setting the limits of a homeowners policy is critical . Regardless of the premium , if the coverage is inadequate to meet a claim you will not be pleased .
Naturally start by having an open and honest discussion with your Licensed Insurance Professional about coverage options that are available to you . Insurance is a participatory sport , though , so it is wise and proper that you do your own `` due diligence '' research as well . Look for a company with a solid and long track record and sound financials . Will that company be around if you need to use the coverage they sell you ? Look for a company and an Agent that takes the time to fully review and inspect your property and bases their recommended coverage on a current Reconstruction Analysis to be sure that you have the right coverage to start . Finally , talk to your Insurance Professional about any available discounts for which you may be eligible .
There are various deductibles in homeowner policies . The higher the chosen amount of the deductible , often between $ 100 and $ 1,000 or more in a typical homeowner policy , the lower the premium you should be paying . The amount you choose as your deductible is what you as a homeowner will absorb in the event of a covered loss . Once the amount of a covered loss is determined , the insurance carrier responds by paying the claim less the homeowner deductible . Generally you choose the amount of your deductible by determining the highest amount you are willing to pay on your own in the event of a covered loss . How much risk can you afford to hold ? Toward determining this , it is important to remember that you do not want to be submitting claims for small losses . A poor loss history will work against you in the long run . So , use that as another determining factor in the amount of your chosen deductible . Always ask your independent agent to help you with this process .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
I know this will sound trite , but you choose a good policy with good advice which means first choosing a good life insurance professional . Also consider that one must choose the right policy , not just a good one . By that I mean , choose a policy that matches the need . If you have a temporary need , term is fine and is inexpensive relative to permanent life products . If you have a permanent need , do not buy term insurance as it is a good product but the wrong solution . Also consider the company you choose since they need to be around to pay the claim - look for top rated insurers . Again , a life insurance professional will help you with all of this .
`` Excess Charges '' only occur with Part B coverage . Whether or not a Medicare Beneficiary may be subjected to Part B Excess Charges by a provider depends entirely on how the provider is contracted with Medicare . When the provider choose their method of contracting with Medicare they must choose whether they will be `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' . This terminology may be confusing but it really is not . `` Participating '' simply means the provider will accept the Medicare assignment of the Medicare approved amount as payment as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered . `` Non-Participating '' means the provider has chosen to not necessarily accept the Medicare approved amount as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered and may choose to charge the beneficiary up to 15 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- in addition to the beneficiary 's cost sharing amount -RRB- . The provider may choose on a case-by-case basis whether to seek excess charges from the beneficiary . This rule applies ONLY to physician fee schedules thus applies only to Medicare Part B charges . So it depends entirely upon whether the provider has chosen to contract as a `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' provider with Medicare . If you are in doubt it may be beneficial to contact the office manager at your provider 's office and ask whether the provider is `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' as it applies to Medicare approved payments . All the best . Mark
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
Homeowners insurance is important part of helping to protect yours ' and your family financial futures . A home is a huge investment without homeowners insurance how will you rebuild after a fire or tornado . How will your protect your assets if someone is hurt on your property if you do n't have homeowners insurance ? This is just a couple of the coverages that are provided by homeowners insurance . To find out more about what a homeowners insurance policy has to offer contact your local agent .
How to check medicare eligibility for providers . The first thing you need is medicare part a & part b . If you have that than you have a choice to stay with original medicare or you can choose a medicare advantage plan . You can choose any provider you want to with part a & b , however the most important thing you want to look out for when choosing a plan is if your doctor and hospital is in the network . Than you want to look at if your medication is covered .
When you take out your policy you can choose your deductible . Most people today are choosing either $ 500 or $ 1000 deductibles . I have seen some at $ 250 . very few people have a $ 100 deductible today because of the difference in premium . When choosing your deductible look at the differences in premium . It usually makes more sense to choose the higher deductible .
You can choose to pay Whole Life for the rest of your life , or you can choose to have it paid up at a set time . You can even choose to purchase some whole life policies with one premium , called Single Premium Whole Life . Premiums are proportionately larger , the shorter the time you choose to pay them . Shop around for a Whole Life policy that offers the options you desire , at a premium you can afford .
-- > Normal 0 Basic homeowners policies provide coverage in three general areas . They agree to indemnify you for some or all of the cost to repair or replace your home or your personal property should it be damaged or destroyed . They agree to indemnify you for some or all of your increased living expenses should your home be damaged or destroyed and you are required to live somewhere else while your home is being repaired . They agree to provide you a legal defense for certain civil actions should something you do or fail to do cause someone injury or damage and they will pay some or all of civil judgments should you be found responsible . How well you are reimbursed for these types of expenses depends on the specific policy you purchase , the premium you pay and the insurer you choose . You might also be interested in the Insurance Library responses to questions like What Should I Look For When Buying Home Insurance ? and How To Select Homeowners Insurance ?
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
The are many deductibles that a homeowner can choose for their insurance . However , the lower the deductible the higher your insurance will be . The average deductible that many choose is $ 1000 . This means that during a claim , you pay the $ 1000 and your insurance company pays the rest . However , the caution to keep in mind : for every claim that you make , your insurance company can raise your rates or cancel your policy . It is important to ask your insurance company if they have waivers for claims and what claims free discounts they offer . 703-651-5817
How much does Medicare cost is a tad subjective , but I 'll try . You 've paid in to Medicare throughout your working carrier so part `` A '' is picked covered . That 's your inpatient care , somelimitationsapply . As soon as you retire and are not covered by private insurance or employer coverage , you 'll be offered part `` B '' from SSI which covers 80 % of your outpatient care , this year cost $ 99 . / month , higher if you made asignificantincome.You also need your prescriptions or pdp . Drug cards start at about $ 10 . / month this year increasing by what plan covers your needs . I just summarized Medicare as it is offered tobeneficiaries . Youcouldchoose aMedicaresupplementalplan . choose the one that best suits your needs . Abenefitrich plan could run about $ 150/mo but would include the part B cost mentioned above . Still need that pdp card . You could choose aMedicareAdvantage plan that tire all your needs into one policy and could cost you $ 0 - $ 100 . / month depending on your location and options you choose . Lastly , you can learn much by going to www.medicare.gov and reading for your self . Medicare Insurance agents are there to assist you and are compensated by insurance companies to help you select and enroll . I hope this has been helpful
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Is For Car Insurance ?
How much is for car insurance ? Hmmm . What is this person attempting to ask ? How many people like auto insurance ? No , I think they mean something else . How much does it cost ? Yes , that 's probably it . Rates vary , depending on your age , location , driving record and vehicle . As experienced brokers , we 're always happy to shop for the best rates and show you the lowest prices . LIVE -LRB- 2014/2015 -RRB- Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier US car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites where consumers find the lowest available rates .
The price of car insurance is governed primarily by the losses sustained by the group of automobiles the insurance company insures . Actuaries analyze losses and determine factors which predict the possibility of claims . For example there is solid evidence that youthful , inexperienced drivers have more accidents than the general population . The insurance company will develop a rating plan that will consider the experience of the driver . We also know that the more miles that we drive , the more likely we are to have an accident . That is why companies often go into great detail over the odometer reading .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
I suggest a number of different approaches . How much coverage would you want the person to carry if they injured you or your family or damaged your property in a car accident ? If you cause an accident , injure family members riding with you and are from a state permitting intra-family suits , how much coverage would you want available to pay for their injuries ? And of course , how much do you stand to lose ? What is your net worth , the value of your earning power , and/or the value of your personal integrity ? None of these methods will lead you to the perfect limit but they are the considerations I would suggest one think about when selecting the appropriate amount of insurance . In addition , I always suggest your uninsured/under-insured motorists coverage -LRB- the one that covers you , your family and possibly the passengers in your car in case the other car is not insured or poorly insured -RRB- be consistent with the coverage you carry in case you hurt someone else . However if none of these considerations apply , one must always be aware of the minimum limits required by most state laws .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
How much is for car insurance ? Hmmm . What is this person attempting to ask ? How many people like auto insurance ? No , I think they mean something else . How much does it cost ? Yes , that 's probably it . Rates vary , depending on your age , location , driving record and vehicle . As experienced brokers , we 're always happy to shop for the best rates and show you the lowest prices . LIVE -LRB- 2014/2015 -RRB- Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier US car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites where consumers find the lowest available rates .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Borrow On Term Life Insurance ?
Typically term life insurance does not provide any cash value , so you would not be able to borrow from it . At this point I am not aware of any term life insurance policies that offer cash accumulation that allow for loans on the policy . There is a type of term policy known as `` Return of Premium '' that provide a portion of yourpremium payments at the end of the policy term if the policy has not been collected on and all policy requirements have been met during the policy period . To find out more about this type of policy contact your local agent to find out if they have it available within the policies they offer .
Unless a life insurance policy has cash value , you can not borrow from it . Term life insurance is `` pure '' protection in that all the premiums go to the death benefit rather than any build up of cash value . Thus , you can not borrow from Term insurance or any other life insurance for which a cash value has not built up within the policy .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
This is a pretty difficult question to answer in a forum like this . I highly recommend that you speak to a professionalone-on-one to completely evaluate your needs and to see if you can borrow - and if so , if it would be financially smart to borrow from a retirement fund . Feel free to contact me if you have no one else . To give you a little idea if you could however , here are some guidelines : Most retirement funds are NOT AVAILABLE to borrow from . If you have a Defined Benefit or a Cash Balance Benefit , you can not borrow from it . You can move your funds to a different account , with professional guidance to avoid penalties . But with these types of accounts , you usually can not touch until you retire . If you have a Profit Sharing account or a 401K - you MAY be able to borrow depending upon the rules of the company that it is through and/or the rules of the company you work for . Again , however , most will not allow you to borrow . If they do , typically you can only borrow 50 % of YOUR contributions -LRB- not what your company contributes -RRB- or $ 10k , whichever is less . Again , this is a very difficult and technical topic to get a solid answer here . Look me up if I can be of any further help .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
In Canada , when you borrow against your life insurance policy the amount you can borrow in stated in the life insurance policy . Important to remember , when you ask for a loan quote , to ask what if any of the amount borrowed will be taxable . Borrowing against a policy directly from the insurance company is considered a `` deemed disposition '' and can trigger a taxable event . When / if you repay the amount you receive a `` tax credit '' . Borrowing directly is private . If you use the policy as collateral from a bank , the loan is not a `` deemed disposition '' and therefore does not trigger a taxable event . The amount you can borrow varies , however , guidelines range from 50 % to 90 % depending on the type of policy and investment . There are consequence and alternatives to borrowing they should be discussed with a good local agent to ensure that you are informed . On a planning note , there are a number of strategies , that leverage individual and corporate borrowing . If you have further questions , contact me . If you are in Nova Scotia , you can request a complimentary strategy session at www.jpw.ca .
If the whole life policy has a cash value you can borrow from the insurance company using your policy as collateral . the amount you can borrow can be as high as 90 % . Check with your life insurance broker to be sure . In Canada , if you borrow in excess of the adjusted cost base of the policy , it will trigger a taxable event . If / when you repay the loan you receive an adjustment you can use when you file your taxes . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral , it does not trigger a taxable event . Check with you life insurance broker , to be advised of the consequents of borrowing . If you do borrow reminder to at least pay the interest on the loan to avoid compound and putting the policy ar risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
You can borrow from your life insurance policy by contacting your insurance company and requesting a loan . You may need to complete a form and you usually can borrow up to 90 % of the cash value . The specifics will be detailed in your policy wording . In Canada , when you borrow you will trigger a taxable gain if the amount borrowed exceeds the adjusted cost base . Be sure to check with the company concerning any tax consequences involved with borrowing . When/if you repay the loan you will receive a credit for this . Using the policy as collateral and borrowing from a bank does not trigger a taxable gain . A reminder , if you do not pay the interest on the loan , it will compound and could put the policy at risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
No , you can not borrow money from a term life insurance policy because there is no cash value from which to borrow . The death benefit is only paid when death occurs , so you can not borrow from the death benefit . The one exception is if you are diagnosed as terminally ill and have an accelerated death benefit rider . That would enable you to take some of the death benefit in cash if you are diagnosed as terminally ill . There are a few term policies that offer living benefits like that for other reasons , such as being diagnosed as chronically or critically ill . Improved term products like that are being developed . Keep in touch to see how you could use your term for purposes other than death , even though technically , you can not borrow money from a term life insurance policy .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most often the lender requires ` hazard insurance ' premiums be included in the escrow account . The borrower may request the insurance be added to an existing escrow account or one set up for the insurance premium but the untimate decision is up to the lender . Normally when establing escrow , the borrower pays the first year premium at closing and the escrow provider includes an additional monthly amount in the mortgage payments for the next 11 or 12 months so there is enough in the escrow account available to pay the renewal premium . What is critical here is for the borrower to keep their insurance carrier informed of any change in the lender 's or escrow servicing entity 's name , address , or account reference number . The borrower should also let the lender know of any changes to the insurance contract which raise or lower the premium . This would include an upcoming renewal premium that may be significantly higher -LRB- for various reasons -RRB- than the expiring premium . Many lenders want policies and documents to go to one address and bills to another -LRB- possibly the escrow servicing entity . -RRB- All borrowers must be cognizant of these items and proactive in notifying all interested parties . The last thing a borrower want is for their ` homeowners policy ' to be cancelled for non-payment because the escrow entity did n't receive the renewal bill so they could pay the renewal premium . Whenever you receive anything from an insurance company you have a policy with , make sure you understand what it is and take action immediately . In the event the policy is cancelled -LRB- for any reason or event -RRB- the lender will no doubt secure ` force placed ' hazard insurance to protect their interest -LRB- and not that of the borrower . -RRB- A forced placed policy will definitely be a lot more expensive premium-wise and a lot more restrictive coverage-wise . Not a good situation to be in and usually totally avoidable . So if a borrower enters this type of situation , they had better ` stay on top of it ' or suffer the consequences .
At no time in the life of Term policies do they have cash value to borrow against , so no you can not borrow against a term policy . Additionally you can not use a term life policy as collateral for a loan as you can with a Whole Life policy . Credit term policies are designed to pay off a debt in the case of death of the debtor before the credit is repaid . On the other hand , Whole Life policies have cash value , grow wealth tax free , may be used as collateral and may be borrowed against . Contact me for more information .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
There are several types of policies which have the ability to build cash value for you to borrow from . Those policies are : Universal Life , Whole Life , Term UL , Return of Premium Term , Indexed Universal Life & Variable Universal Life . Like Mark was saying , you do have to have the cash value available to borrow or withdraw . Remember , if you borrow the money as a loan , and if you lapse the policy , the loan may create a taxable event if the money you borrowed is greater than the premium paid . Contact your broker/agent to review your policy or you may be able to call the company as well . Good Luck .
The only type of life insurance that you can borrow from is Universal Life or Whole Life . You can not borrow from Term Life . There are many types of Universal Life and Whole Life , and especially with Universal Life , some policies will have very little cash value . If you are purchasing a Universal Life policy for the purpose of borrowing from it , you will do best with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life .
Credit Life Insurance contracts are designed to protect the creditor and the borrower 's family from incurring a loss due to the death of the borrower . A life insurance policy is taken out on the borrower for the amount of the loan or credit extended . The named beneficiary is the creditor who extends the loan / credit . Should the borrower die before the loan is paid off the creditor is paid by the insurance policy and therefore also protects the family of the borrower from incurring the debt . Typically these policies are `` decreasing Term '' policies , which decrease in value as the loan is paid down .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Does My Auto Insurance Score Mean ?
Many auto insurance companies utilize consumer credit information and specialized algorithms designed to predict the likelihood of future claims . An auto insurance score may use both consumer credit , demographic data , driving records , and past claims information to predict future claims . These scores are then used to determine what premium rate to charge . People expected to make fewer claims pay less , and those expected to make more claims pay a higher rate .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
I hope I understand your question correctly . I 'm assuming you 're asking if an insurance company getting your insurance score will show up on your credit report and affect your credit score . In general , no . I can only speak for my own state of Michigan but I 'm pretty sure other states work the same way . An insurance score is different from a credit score . There are many different models to calculate an insurance score and different companies will use different models . When an insurance company orders an insurance score it wo n't affect your credit score like applying for a loan will . If it shows up at all , it will show up as an insurance score and wo n't be used to calculate your credit score . So , do n't be worried if your agent asks for information to order an insurance score . It 's usually one of the largest discounts that a company will offer .
Great Question . what effects your auto insurance score is many factors . 1 . how long you been with your prior company . 2 . what is your current auto liability limits . 3 . your credit score . 4 . your driving record . while not all those factors are the same with every company some companies use them for score and other use other factors always check with the company that is going to insure you auto .
Many auto insurance companies will use credit scores to determine the premium rates to charge . Credit scores have proven to be very effective at predicting future claims . On the flip side auto insurance companies do not report claims data . When your report is accessed by the auto insurance company a soft inquiry is logged . Creditors and credit scores do not see soft inquiries , and therefor do not impact your score .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
There is an old expression regarding personal insurance : Whatever the coverage remember your really insuring people . The idea is that you can underwrite insurance including renters insurance from such items as amount of insurance , location , prior losses , amount of liability coverage and such , but behind every policy is a person . So , you can expect that most companies today use rating algorithms that include the items mentioned above as insurance score -LRB- a variation of credit scores -RRB- , your age , whether you have vicious dogs , occupation and whether the property will be occupied by you during the day etc. . Typically , it is an inexpensive policy and as such there really is not a lot of money in the commission nor expense factor of the company . What that means is that it is underwritten by class and one policy is not much different than the other . My recommendation to you is to start with your auto insurer . I frequently find the pricing of renters policy nearly all offset by the savings you get from having both with the same company . To give you an example here in the Atlanta area a 25,000 contents renters policy might be $ 150 per year , while the amount of credit for having it with the same company on your auto policy might be as much as $ 125 .
Some insurance carriers may use a credit score for rating purposes . Most of the insurance carriers in my state -LRB- New York -RRB- use a ` credit profile ' which means they access one of the big three credit bureaus and select specific items . What they select , how they interpret the data , and how it affects your premiums is not available for your scrutiny . In NY , credit profile is mostly used for new business quoting purposes for home and auto insurance . Carriers in NY load in a whole bunch of rating info when determining your premium - gender , age , marital status , own or rent your home , driving extract , # of years licensed , prior claims on home and/or auto policies , is your prior carrier preferred , standard , or substandard , distance driven to work , pleasuire or business use , and a lot more . Keep your ` credit profile ' and score as clean as possible . Most banks and credit unions have credit specialists who can advise you for free on how to do this . For example , pay all bills ahead of time if possible and always pay more than the minimum amounts . Do n't have credit lines totaling more than a certain % of your gross annual income , etc. . Credit profile is a major influence when getting insurance quotes . I know of no ` proof ' credit profile is a determinate of loss potential , but using credit profile for insurance rating is the way of the world .
Life insurance typically does not impact your credit score . However , car payments and mortgage payments can have a huge impact on your score if you constantly are late with your payments . A lower credit score means it will cost you more to borrow money , and over time , that could cost thousands of extra dollars . Also , if you have TOO MUCH life insurance and are paying quite a bit , it could impact your score . This question was also answered by Tyler Maddox earlier in the year .
Sometimes applying for Life Insurance can slightly affect your Credit Score . Occasionally some companies will use Credit Score as a determining factor in your Premiums . And they will run your Credit Score to find out what it is . According to Experian `` Inquiries '' account for only 10 % of your Credit Score . And `` Excessive '' inquiries count against you . So unless you have had multiple recent inquiries , a single inquiry from an Insurance Company should not affect it too much according to Experian . However , I am a life insurance specialist , not a credit specialist . Experian , TransUnion , & Equifax all have some good info on their sites about what makes up your score and what can affect it .
I am assuming that this question is asking if having automobile insurance helps a persons credit score . Based on my education and my experience so far in the industry , I would say no it does help build your credit score . To the best of my knowledge insurance carriers do not directly provide any financial information to the credit agencies .
Are you asking , `` If I receive life insurance money as a beneficiary , will it affect my credit score ? '' If so , it will not do so unless you start charging more things and paying them off quickly . If you are asking , `` Does paying my life insurance premium affect my credit score ? '' The answer again is no , unless you pay the bill by credit card and pay it on time each month .
Start by understanding what your credit score is and how to improve it . Simple tips from lenders websites can help . my personal experience is that mortgage companies like insurers are trying to assess responsibility in how you live your life . credit scores and insurance scores are measures of that . When you have worked to get ally our credit score with all your `` ducks '' in a row cal the lender and ask .
Applying for auto insurance or shopping around for a better rate does not impact your credit score . Many car insurers pull your credit report and consider your generic risk score when determining what rate to charge . When this occurs a soft inquiry is noted on your report . Soft inquiries are visible only to you when you review your personal report . Soft inquiries are not seen by lenders , or used in calculating your score .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Credit reports and scores are commonly used by auto insurance companies when underwriting and pricing the policy premiums . Credit scores have been shown to be highly correlated with future auto insurance claims . However , auto insurance companies do not report premium payment or claims information to the credit bureaus . So there is no direct impact of car insurance on your credit worthiness . However there may be an indirect impact on your credit if you suffer an auto accident while uninsured , or under insured . You may suffer from a loss of income if disabled . There may be extra medical bills , car repair expenses , and other liabilities . Any of these situations could make it difficult to make timely payments on any existing loans or debts . Late payments will certainly hurt your credit .
No . Getting auto insurance quotes will not affect your credit score . This is a myth that just will not go away ! If you were to apply for multiple credit cards or multiple loans , that would negatively affect your credit score . and because of that , many people make the false assumption that getting quotes with multiple auto insurance companies would also hurt your credit score . But that is simply not true .
Not at all . The insurance compnies use a soft pull credit score which does not show up on your credit report . You can obtain as many quotes as you wish and it will not change your score at all , and will show up as a pull . Only a hard pull from a credit card , auto loan , or mortgage would show up . So just start shopping away , your score will not change at all .
Credit scores are often used by auto insurance carriers to determine premium rates . These scores have proven to be predictive of future accident claims . Auto insurance companies use credit reports in underwriting , but they do not report premium payment information to the bureaus . So there is no direct impact on your credit rating if you fail to make premium payments . However there may be a variety of indirect impacts on your score . If you are pulled over and fail to show evidence of insurance you may have to pay a fine . If you have an accident while uninsured , you may face large expenses for repairs , liabilities , medical expenses , and more . These added expenses could easily force you to become delinquent on debts that are reported to credit bureaus .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Equity Indexed Universal Life Insurance Work ?
Indexed universal life uses domestic and foreign indices with crediting methods : cap rates , participation rates and spread rates . The life insurance company generally purchases index options . If the options are exercised a positive credit is applied . If the options are not exercised , then nothing is credited . Like all life insurance policies , index universal life has policy fess , expenses and cost of insurance that is deducted from the premium . Then the credit , if any , is applied .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
Global Index Universal Life Insurance is IUL that offers interest crediting based on an equity index strategy option that includes foreign stock market indexes in addition to US stock marked indexes . Non US indexes commonly used are the EuroSTOXX 50 Index -LRB- Western Europe -RRB- and the Hang Seng Index -LRB- Hong Kong -RRB- . Depending on the Global Index Universal Life product , it usually offers the choices of a fixed interest strategy , an indexed strategy , or a combination of the two . The features of IUL that attracts consumers is the potential to accumulate higher than normal cash values through their ability to take advantage of the upside potential of the market . Yet there is a 0 % floor that helps protect them against downside risks .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
All cash value life insurance policies have the potential to accumulate equity . But policy expense loads , loan interest cost and surrender charges can reduce the net cash values in any one year . Its important to understand the cost associated with a cash value policy that is designed to generate income for retirement income purposes . If designed to maximize cash accumulation , it can be an alternative to supplement retirement income . If designed incorrectly , it can be one of the worst savings vehicles . The permanent polices that have the potential to accumulate cash values and distribute tax advantaged income are participating whole life and current assumption universal life . Both use crediting methods based on interest rates . Current assumption universal life also offers crediting methods using domestic and foreign indices -LRB- indexed universal life -RRB- and equity / bond subaccounts -LRB- variable universal life . -RRB-
The word `` equity '' tends to lead to a bit of confusion in the definition . An equity indexed annuity is not actually invested in the stock market . An index such as the S&P 500 would be referenced over a specified period of time -LRB- such as one year -RRB- and if the index has increased in value , your annuity would be credited interest . One of the advantages of an indexed annuity is that if the referenced index declines over any year , you would not lose any value as a result . You would simply not be credited with interest for that year .
IUL stands for Indexed Universal Life -LRB- often called Equity Indexed Universal Life -RRB- . While guaranteed universal life is the type of policy one might use for permanent coverage at a low cost , IUL is the type of policy one might use to accumulate income for retirement in a relatively safe manner .
Cash values life insurance can be a savings or investment policy depending upon which crediting method is used and how the policy is designed . There are three saving life insurance policies : Participating whole life insurance , current assumption universal life insurance and indexed universal life insurance . There is one investment life insurance policy that uses a crediting method of separate sub accounts with equity and bond allocations : Variable universal life . The performance of a life insurance policy as a savings or investment policy may depend on the policy design . That design must use the lowest cost of insurance death benefit option that complies with the TAMRA regulations to contain the policy expense . If designed correctly , life insurance can be a great savings or investment policy that can generate tax free retirement income as long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured .
There are four types of permanent life insurance policies that have the potential to accumulate cash values : participating whole life , current interest rate universal life , index universal life and variable life . Participating whole life credits dividends when declared , i.e. there not guaranteed . The other three are current assumption universal life policies that can credit an interest rate , an index return or a separate sub account performance -LRB- which could be negative -RRB- with access to market equities and bonds . After the policy fee , premium load , admin expense and cost of insurance is paid , the earnings , if any , are credited to the account cash values and net premium . Keep in mind these policies generally have surrender charges applied to the cash values account in the early years of the contact .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
Yes , Indexed Universal Life Insurance works . If your goal is to build up cash value inside a life insurance policy that can offer financial flexibility later on , then it can work great . Universal life insurance accumulates cash inside the policy due to the success of a financial index such as the S&P 500 . Most companies give you choices of individual indexes or blends of several indexes and offer a `` floor '' of zero or 1 % . It is important to note that your money is NOT in the stock market . Interest is credited to your account if the referenced index goes up over a pre-selected length of time . Generally , insurance companies will put a cap on the amount of upside you can get because they are guaranteeing you no downside if the index goes down . Often , the caps can be 13 % - 17 % with blended index choices . Make sure you set reasonable expectations for what `` success '' is , though . Building significant cash value inside an indexed universal life insurance policy does n't happen over night . You should allow 10 to 15 years for accumulation for college education costs or a retirement income stream . And remember , even if you use the available cash build-up over the years , you still have the death benefit to pass on to your family upon your passing . As always , it is all about `` fit '' when it comes to financial products and Indexed Universal Life is no different . The design of the IUL is important and best left in the hands of an experienced , licensed financial professional .
A non-modified endowment life insurance policy designed with the lowest cost of insurance can be an excellent option to traditional retirement plans if you have more than 15 years to retirement , if the insured in your family is very healthy , if your present tax bracket is low , if your employer does n't match your 401k contributions , if your employer does n't offer a 401k plan . Permanent cash value life insurance has four policies you should consider : Indexed universal life with access to domestic and foreign indices , Variable universal life with access to separate sub accounts featuring equities and bonds investments , current assumption universal life and participating whole life , which are interest rate credited .
To clarify the question : what life insurance can build cash value ? Generally , there are four types of cash value products that could generate accumulating cash values : Current Assumption Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Variable Universal life and Participating Whole Life Insurance . The performance of interest rates , indices and market equities may or may not credit any earnings and life insurance has policy expenses . Each policy owner must assess their risk tolerance for each type of life insurance contract . Participating whole life insurance base policies have guaranteed cash values . Lastly , a few guaranteed universal life insurance policies have some cash values in the later years , but should not be considered as a cash accumulation vehicle .
Life insurance addresses three major planning goals : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification is insuring the lives of family members or business associates for the economic benefit of their beneficiaries . To indemnify the economic liability of short term financial exposure , you may want to consider term life insurance with a conversion policy provision to permanent life insurance . If the financial liability is perpetual , a permanent life insurance policy is recommended . Guaranteed universal life is the most economical of permanent policies . Income from life insurance policies can generate tax advantaged distributions for supplemental retirement planning . There are four life insurance policies to consider based on your risk tolerance . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life use interest rate crediting methods . Indexed universal life can use domestic and foreign indices . Variable universal life use separate subaccounts allocated to equities and bonds . Inheritance planning with life insurance can address estate transfer taxation , charitable giving and creating an estate for children and grandchildren . Married couples should consider guaranteed survivorship where two lives are used in one policy which can result real savings instead of two separate policies .
It depends on the financial planning goal . Life insurance addresses three major planning goals : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification is insuring the lives of family members or business associates for the economic benefit of their beneficiaries . To indemnify the economic liability of short term financial exposure , you may want to consider term life insurance with a conversion policy provision to permanent life insurance . If the financial liability is perpetual , a permanent life insurance policy is recommended . Guaranteed universal life is the most economical of permanent policies . Income from life insurance policies can generate tax advantaged distributions for supplemental retirement planning . There are four life insurance policies to consider based on your risk tolerance . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life use interest rate crediting methods . Indexed universal life can use domestic and foreign indices . Variable universal life use separate subaccounts allocated to equities and bonds . Inheritance planning with life insurance can address estate transfer taxation , charitable giving and creating an estate for children and grandchildren . Married couples should consider guaranteed survivorship where two lives are used in one policy which can result real savings instead of two separate policies .
Life Insurance works as an investment by using the excess premiums you put in , after the cost of insurance and other internal costs are paid for . This excess premium is credited interest either by an internal account or via an index if the life insurance is an equity indexed universal life or whole life policy . You get the benefit of compounding interest and tax deferral or tax free income depending on how you take the money out of the policy and the status of the policy ie. , is it lapsed or not . This is a `` cliff-notes '' version for you . Reach out to your broker/agent to get an illustration to see examples of possibilities . Keep in mind , I do not recommend using this for 100 % of your investments however to use this as a supplemental investment .
Product suitability is always a consideration when considering product lines that have such diverse application . Life insurance is generally purchased for indemnification or inheritance planning , but can be used as supplemental retirement income . Term life insurance is an excellent for temporary coverage for temporary financial exposure to your beneficiaries . For permanent liabilities , many planners use guaranteed universal life insurance . For supplemental retirement income there are several crediting methods : for interest rate crediting you can use participating whole life or current assumption universal life . If you desire access to domestic and/or foreign indices , you should review indexed universal life insurance . If your risk tolerance permits , you could consider variable universal life with access to separate sub accounts that use marker equities and bond instruments .
There is a diversity of life insurance products to fit multiple planning applications like indemnification , income and inheritance scenarios . Term and guaranteed universal insurance are generally indemnification and inheritance products to protect the policy beneficiaries from financial liabilities or benevolent giving of the policy insured . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life are conservative interest rate crediting policies for income scenarios . Other polices for income scenarios are Indexed universal life crediting earnings from indices , both domestic and foreign as well as variable universal life insurance which can credit from the guaranteed interest account or the separate sub accounts utilizing market equities and bond instruments . Product suitability , from a policy holder point of view , is determined by creating a financial profile that includes establishing product risk tolerance , economic goals and a reasonable timeline of life events based on life expectancy .
Hey , wait a minute . You are leaving out what is in my opinion , the best of the best . This category is Equity Indexed Universal Life . It is permanent insurance , like whole , but at a lower cost , like term . It builds up equity , like whole , but is tied to the stock market , with none of the risk . It has a guaranteed bottom , and will never go down , but will go up , with a cap , when the stock market goes up . It allows your equity to grow much faster that whole , at a lower cost . You need to consider this product in making your decision . Talk with your agent . GARY LANE . garylane@cox.net . 7144229616 . Available through Premier Financial Alliance and National Life Group , one of America 's oldest insurance companies ! Thank you .
end question
start question
annuities
Which Are The Best Variable Annuities ?
Variable annuities are securities . You can lose all your money , unless you deposit the entire amount into the guaranteed interest rate account . Before moving forward with variable annuity recommendations you must first , like all security purchases , establish your financial profile , risk tolerance and economic goal to establish client suitability for this and/or any other product . The present variable annuities may be too expensive for the value proposition of an investor . Last decade , during the interest rate arms race , variable annuities had economic viability . Today these policies have changed enough to warrant due care examination of the cost versus the value they deliver .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
The annuity offerings change all the time . The best today maybe not be the best tomorrow . Annuities are categorized into basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Sentinel is a very good fixed interest rate annuity company . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Genworth is a very good index annuity company . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money . Prudential is a very good variable annuity company .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
A non-qualified , tax deferred fixed rate annuity is only as guaranteed as the contract provisions outline and is only as good as the annuity insurance company that issued the contract . That being said , many financial stable annuity insurance companies offer a non-qualified tax deferred fixed rate annuities , generally at 5 , 7 and 10 year periods . A non-qualified , tax deferred variable annuity is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . ;
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities are classified as a security . Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities have separate sub accounts using market equities and bond investments that can lose money and incur policy expenses . A personal financial profile needs to be created with a risk tolerance assessment before moving forward with the purchase of a non-qualified or qualified tax deferred variable annuities or the allocation of the separate sub accounts . Variable annuity policy expense loads can be a concern as policy expenses are paid out of deposits made into the annuity regardless of positive or negative performance . Variable annuities , like all annuities , are designed ultimately for generating income . You may want to consider purchasing an income rider that may offer guaranteed lifetime income .
A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals .
Variable annuities are only good for people with a high level of risk tolerance . Variable annuities can lose money , as well as , gain money . Hence , the term variable . When looking at variable annuities make sure you understand the risks involved . There are some great agents that can help you decide if these investments are the best fit for your tolerance and situation . There are other annuities that do not pay as much interest but are safer . For example , some annuities offer `` floors '' . Every annuity has some pros and cons so just make sure you understand the contract .
A variable annuity is a financial planning tool . It can help some customers but is not necessarily correct for everyone . The variable annuity addresses the risk of inflation , which a fixed annuity doesnt . The fixed annuity addresses the risk of safety of principle , which the variable annuity does not . It is like comparing a stock portfolio with a savings account .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Kentucky Tax Life Insurance Benefits ?
Kentucky does not charge income tax on life insurance benefits if they are left to a person , rather than the estate . If life insurance goes through probate , it will be taxed . Life insurance benefits are charged Kentucky inheritance taxes , with varying degrees of exemptions given to different types of heirs . They are also subject to federal estate taxes if of a sufficient amount , and in the estate of the last remaining spouse .
Kentucky does not charge income tax on life insurance benefits if they are left to a person , rather than the estate . If life insurance goes through probate , it will be taxed . Life insurance benefits are charged Kentucky inheritance taxes , with varying degrees of exemptions given to different types of heirs . They are also subject to federal estate taxes if of a sufficient amount , and in the estate of the last remaining spouse .
In addition to the other information , it 's important to know that if the policy was replacing other coverage when it was issued , some states do not allow a new contestability period beyond what the replaced policy had . Kentucky for example would not allow a company to not pay a claim if someone committed sucide a week after buying the policy IF it replaced an existing policy that had been in force for over two years . The new policy is non-contestable from the first day up to the face amount of the old policy . It 's very important in Kentucky to make sure you receive a copy of the replacement form and keep it with your new policy . Most states do not have this added protection but if your does , it can make a huge difference with your insurance claim .
The penalty is $ 500 or more plus court costs for a first-time offence . Court costs are often between $ 150 and $ 200 dollars . In addition to the fines for driving without insurance , the state of Kentucky can cancel your car registration if you do not have insurance . Insurance companies provide a list of insured drivers to the state . If the state does not receive notification that you have insurance for 60 days , they will send a notice to provide evidence of coverage . If you do not provide evidence of coverage within 30 days , your auto registration may be canceled .
Life insurance proceeds that are left to a beneficiary are exempt from creditors in Kentucky , as long as the beneficiary is not a co-signer to the insured person 's debt . If the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is the estate , creditors can go after life insurance proceeds upon the insured person 's death .
When states try to be unusually restrictive they often penalize the insurance consumers in that state . For example , a few states do n't allow different rates based on gender . When that happens , most life insurance companies simply charge females the male rates . It penalizes the females around 20 % compared to what they pay in other states . New York 's restrictive requirement on insurance companies raises a lot of money for the state but greatly limits the consumer choices to just a few . Many products are not available to them that they could buy if they moved to any other state . Kentucky 's law about no new contestable period on replacement policies does protect consumers but it also causes some companies to choose not to offer products in that state . State insurance laws can be a double edged sword .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
Most states are not no-fault states . However , there are a handful of states that are considered `` no fault . '' Based on my 32 years of experience in the business -LRB- and I do make mistakes ! -RRB- , I believe these states are no fault . But you can always check with the State Dept. Of Insurance to verify : Pennsylvania Florida Michigan New Jersey Utah Minnesota North Dakota Kentucky Massachusetts Hawaii Minnesota New York
This is a Good Question . Typically if your card is not automatically sent to you 3 months before your 65th birthday , you can apply online at the social security or Medicare site , you can also go to your local social security office . If you are working still , you may be able to defer part B . If you are in the Illinois , Kentucky , Arizona , Florida , Hawaii , Michigan , Montana , New Mexico or Wyoming , you can contact me ; otherwise contact a broker in your area to help you with all your options .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
WellPoint Health Networks , Inc. merged with Anthem where the name WellPoint , Inc. was adopted . WellPoint is an independent company of the BCBS Association . WellPoint is nowthe largest managed health care company in the Blue Cross and Blue Shield family association serving California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indian , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia , Washington D.C. , and Wisconsin . It operates under other names in the mentioned states as Blue Cross , Anthem and UniCare .
I am going to answer this question as someone who sells whole life and universal life only . I do not sell variable life insurance , which is typically considered an investment . First of all , I think the word `` investment '' does not really apply to life insurance , regardless of the type of product . This is because life insurance is first and foremost intended to provide a benefit to survivors . Any cash it develops is nice to have , but it is secondary . The first priority in buying life insurance should be getting the most attractive premium for the entire time you need coverage . Even with very aggressive underwriting , that cost can be higher than the costs associated with conventional investment products . Now , life insurance does have specific tax advantages . These include tax-deferred cash accumulation , and income-tax free benefits . You should speak with your tax advisor for more details . If the insured is young enough , and qualifies for a low enough rate , and is in a high-enough tax bracket , then the cost of his life insurance might be lower than the taxes he would pay on an investment outside life insurance . Here life insurance may be considered a smart `` investment . '' In most other cases , life insurance would not be a smart investment . But , with a strong product from a strong company , the guaranteed cash value in a whole life or universal life product could be significant . You could get more bang for your buck inside life insurance that you would from a standard conservative investment . For that reason , people do use life insurance as the guaranteed or conservative part of their financial portfolio .
In general , yes , the life insurance death benefit is income tax-free -LRB- IRC Section 101 -LRB- a -RRB- -RRB- . But , there are situations where this benefit may be lost . If too much premium is paid into the policy in violation of Section 7702 of the IRC , the policy is no longer considered life insurance , and the death benefit is income taxable . Insurance companies monitor this and usually take action to prevent such violations . Insurance professionals worry more about the following more common situations where the death benefit can be taxable since the burden is on the policy owner to monitor and violations are usually not caught before it is too late . 1 . Since 2006 , new rules apply to life insurance in a business context which subjects the life insurance death benefit to income tax . If the policy does not meet the special requirements of Section 101 -LRB- j -RRB- such as the notice and consent or protected class requirementsthe death benefit may be income taxable . There is also an annual IRS reporting requirement -LRB- Form 8925 -RRB- . We find most small business owners are not aware , especially of the latter requirement . Most tax professionals are usually not aware either . This is a common and growing problem which generally can not be corrected -LRB- except to cancel policies and start over -RRB- . 2 . Three parties to a policy -LRB- aka Goodman triangle -RRB- : If a third-party owner names a different third-party beneficiary of a life contract , the proceeds may be income taxable or gift taxable . 3 . If the policy falls within the transfer-for-value rule and does not qualify for a safe-harbor exception , its death benefit is income taxable . Business owners should meet with a life insurance professional who can perform a comprehensive policy review and can coordinate with your tax and legal advisors . These comments are for planning purposes only and are not tax or legal advice .
The answer to your question is no and yes but still pretty much no . The most effective way to structure a DI policy is after through a funding arangement that uses after tax dollars to fund the policies premiums . The reasoning is that one is investing in a DI policy to reduce the financial impact that one occurs due to either a short-term disability , a long-term disability or some merging of the two . The DI policy will be subject to state and federal taxes , either one pays with `` post-tax '' dollars which have been subject to FICA/FUTA taxes and have the benefits payed without without extra tax concerns -LRB- however the benefits will be reported and taxed as income -RRB- , or one can structure DI that are offered as a employee benefit with pre-tax funding but with increased liabilities to ones benefits -LRB- reporting is the same -RRB- . The opportunity cost of delaying that additional tax obligation does not carry with it enough benefits to offset the disadvantages . If your question is simply can you include DI premiums as qualified medical expenses that would be put them into IRC Section 213 `` tax-advantaged '' status , no you can not .
Broad questions deserve broad answers and so the question as to taxation of life insurance benefits is this : Generally , life insurance benefits are paid free of income taxation when paid to individuals . But , there are exceptions and possible complications to this simple answer . One big potential problem is when the decedent is also the policy owner and the life insurance gets added to the value of an estate and then taxed in that way . The IRS looks for incidents of ownership up three years prior to the death . Also , life insurance paid to an estate that is subject to other forms of taxation may result in the life benefits being taxed as well so it is n't always a good idea to pay life benefits to an estate . Also , life insurance after the first $ 50,000 is taxed when premium was paid by the employer . Life insurance you buy separately under group options are generally not taxed as income -LRB- provided all the rules are followed - see above -RRB- . Also , generally when a corporation pays the premium and the benefits are payable to the corporation , they ca n't write off the premium and collect the benefit free of income taxation . Under current law life insurance proceeds are only excludable up to the amounts of premium paid by the corpo in following with laws placed on the books in 2006 . There is a whole host of rules that must be followed to avoid taxation but it is possible that life insurance can be paid to a corporation and avoid taxation . While most of us will not be subject to taxation on the life insurance benefit it pays to understand how these benefits become taxable . Then , it is reasonably easy to avoid these pitfalls . Do n't also overlook the advice of a good agent and avoid the use of life insurance trusts to make sure the money moves to the beneficiary without taxation to the largest extent possible .
I am a huge fan of Critical Illness plans -LRB- CI -RRB- . So I 'm happy to add to the great comments above . What is covered is always defined ... . yet there are a few `` twists to look for '' . Most CI plans have moved to a `` multiple bucket '' philosophy . Most cover the `` Big Three '' critical illnesses : Cancer , Heart Attack , & Stroke . What you have to understand is if the policy is a `` One and Done '' or a `` Multiple Bucket '' plan . One and Done means that once the benefit is paid out for one CI , then the policy terminates . Diagnosed with cancer , you get the check , but there is no benefit for hart attack or stroke . A multiple bucket policy usually has a benefit for different categories -LRB- buckets of money -RRB- : Heart/Stroke , Cancer , Other . So you could be diagnosed with cancer & a benefit is paid . Then the stress gives you a heart attack & a benefit is paid . Then after all that , some `` other CI '' happens and you get a 3rd benefit . ALSO consider what the definitions are WHEN a benefit is paid . Consider an Organ Transplant benefit . Does it pay upon diagnosis and being added to the national registry or does it pay when the physical transplant is completed ? That 's a biiiiig timing difference . Also consider the `` Carcinoma in Situ '' definition and benefit amount . That 's when cancer is isolated to one tissue type -LRB- general definition -RRB- . Being smaller & localized , a Carcinoma in Situ is generally `` not as dangerous or life threatening '' . I believe all CI plans with a Carcinoma in Situ benefit pays only a percentage of the full benefit . So if you have a $ 10,000 cancer bucket , yet it 's Carcinoma in Situ , do you get 10 or 25 % of the full benefit ? Hmmmmm . OR ... does the CI plan your agent is offering even have an in Situ ??? Most have in Situ benefits . Just double check . If you trigger the in Situ benefit know that you still have the remaining percentage left in case the cancer spreads . Usually called invasive cancer . If you received $ 2500 out of your $ 10,000 when it was in Situ , you still have $ 7500 in your `` bucket '' in case things get worse . Look at the riders -LRB- additional benefits too -RRB- . Return of premium upon death -LRB- other than a named CI -RRB- or return of premium after a named period of time , Mortgage payment , accident benefits , hospital benefits , and children 's benefits are riders offered by various carriers . Weigh the cost vs. the benefit based on YOUR specific needs . PLEASE consider coverage for your children . I know that if one of my girls was living in a children 's hospital fighting cancer , I 'd also live there . The cash injection can be financially life saving . HOPE all this helped ... - gravy
The IRS does not tax most life insurance with income tax . If a cash value policy is a Modified Endowment Contract , the cash value is taxed . And if there is interest paid to a beneficiary because they are receiving their life insurance proceeds on a payment plan , the interest is taxed . Also , money left to the estate is taxed . But as a general rule , if money is life to a person as beneficiary , that person does not pay income tax on the life insurance received . Estate taxes do apply to life insurance , if the amount of the estate is above the exempted amount .
In Canada , disability insurance payments are usually structured so that the payment is tax free . This applies to individual plans as well as group plans . The basic principle is , if the premium is paid with after tax dollars , then the benefit is tax free . If the premium is deducted as an expense -LRB- employee benefit -RRB- , then the benefit payment is taxable . That is why with group insurance plans the premium split is structured so that the employee pays the Long Term Disability -LRB- LTD -RRB- portion of the premium . This is done to keep the benefit tax free . Plans can be structured to provide a benefit to employees with the company paying the premium on the policies and deducting it as an expense . Certain rules need to be followed . Here is an overview : Company pays premium for coverage , gets the deduction , employee does not pay tax on the premium `` benefit '' , but any disability benefit is taxable . In order to offset the income tax , the amount of coverage the employee is permitted to apply for is increased . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are 2 life insurance benefits that this question may be asking about : The death benefit or cash that has accumulated inside the policy . The death benefit is always income tax free in every state when received as a lump sum . Many insurance companies offer a larger death benefit if the benefit is received over time . If this is the case , then the additional benefit above the base death benefit would be taxable . There are also living benefits in some life insurance policies when the policy is used to accumulate cash such as in an indexed universal life policy . In this type of policy , cash accumulates on a tax-deferred basis and can be removed from the policy tax-free as a policy loan . Estate taxes may be due on life insurance benefits in some cases .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does My Renters Insurance Cover Theft ?
Talk to your Insurance professional , but in most cases , modern Renters Insurance Policies do include theft as a covered peril , yes . Now , there may be policy limits included that you need to know about . In some cases , companies can settle covered theft losses on certain things , like camera equipment for example , based upon a stated `` inside limit '' listed on your policy 's declaration sheet . Further , your personal property may be covered outside your home -LRB- while on vacation or in your car as two examples -RRB- but only up to a stated maximum of 10 % of the total Personal Property coverage amount .
If you 're insured with a reputable company and a good agent , your renters policy should include theft . All a renters policy is is a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It 's there to cover your stuff and your liability . It 's rare , but there are companies that offer coverage that may not include theft . This coverage form is called `` Basic Form '' and it will not cover theft . Never , never , never accept a policy written on a basic form for your renters coverage . The most common form is Broad Form , and it will cover theft . Most companies and agents will use this when writing your renters policy . Do n't accept anything less .
-- > Normal 0 Renters -LRB- Tenant/Homeowners -RRB- Insurance policies will usually cover your personal property anywhere in the world . Of course , most tenant / homeowner policies also provide coverage on a named peril basis and theft is usually a specifically defined covered peril . So , in a general sense , renters policies should cover theft of your covered personal property while it is away from your home subject to the policys exclusions and limitations . Common limitations include : no coverage for theft from a dwelling under construction -LRB- often can be added -RRB- , theft from another residence you own or rent unless you are temporarily residing there , theft from the part of a residence you rent to someone , theft of boats , their equipment , trailers or campers , etc. .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
Renters insurance does not cover vehicle theft . Vehicle theft would be covered under your auto insurance policy provided you carry comprehensive coverage on your auto policy . However , if you have a renters insurance policy and some of your personal items were in the vehicle that was stolen they may be covered by your renters policy as long as the items are personal items and not part of the vehicle .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance will cover your personal property up to the limits of your policy . For example if you have $ 50,000 in personal property coverage in the policy and all your clothes and furniture were destroyed in the fire then you would be able to claim that as a loss . Renters Insurance only covers your personal property and does not cover the structure . It will also cover for losses for theft . Lets say you had your lap top from home in your car and someone broke in your car and stole the computer then you could file that as a claim on your renters insurance policy . Some renters insurance also covers for Loss of Use and Personal Property off premises . This may not be available from ever insurance carrier .
I previously posted this piece in response to a renter insurance question . I am sharing it here , hoping that it might be of value in answer to this inquiry . Mr. Pipes provides a good summary before me and concludes with an important question . I am adding this message with a personal example of the value of this coverage . Renters insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and several other common loss circumstances . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
Although I have answered similar questions of this nature previously , it is such an important coverage that I will repeat it . While I obviously do not know your particular situation and whether or not your landlord requires you to maintain renters insurance , I can tell you the following that might help you see the value of some of the coverages provided . Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . That alone would have cost them heavy legal fees . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time .
Let me add one point . Theft and Mysterious disappearance are two separate things . So talk with your agent . Theft coverage will respond if there is evidence of a theft . For example a broken door lock or other evidence that someone gained access to your premises . The broader coverage available from some carriers can include mysterious disappearance which is basically that the insured item is not where you believed it to be and therefore has been possibly stolen or you simply do not understand how it disappeared . Mysterious disappearance is generally more expensive than theft , and is generally purchased in-connection with protecting valuable articles of jewelry , watches and furs or other property that have their own sub limits in a homeowners or renters policy . Read the policy relative to how jewelry , watches and fine arts are protected and if it does not sound like enough coverage talk to your agent .
Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time
I have answered this question previously but it is such an important coverage that I will repeat it . Renters ' insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and others . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . No one was hurt but the apartment became uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy , they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions and they received reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . Additionally , the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... but the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time .
Renters insurance will cover a limited amount of theft from your car , such as contents of the vehicle . It will not cover theft of any equipment attached to the car . Renters works like homeowner coverage with smaller limits and more restrictions on what is actually covered . You are welcome to call me with any additional questions . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
The most common homeowner policy forms of coverage written in the USA today includes the peril of theft - also called the `` cause of loss '' . All policies also include limitations and exclusions that may restrict theft to certain dollar figures or certain types of property to a certain dollar amounts . Generally speaking , the theft of an air conditioning unit is not one of the common types of property that is limited or excluded . You should not assume this advice is the same for policies covering rental properties as they are occasionally written without the theft peril due to the choice of coverage terms . In some rare cases theft is a cause of loss that can be bought back in certain coverage amounts for an additional premium on rental/landlord type policies . The DF3 or DP3 forms include theft for landlords but check local representatives for specific advice in your locality that conforms to local custom and practice . Either way , it is still a good question for your local representative who can point to the exact language or limitation in your insurance coverage and help you understand how to deal with the new exposure to the theft of devices and property that has aluminum , copper , and other metals of value from your property . .
You can find stripped down Renters Insurance policies for as little as $ 50.00 per year from any local agent if you have good credit . Most people spend about $ 150.00 per year on Renters Insurance as they find value in some of the optional endorsements , such as personal property replacement cost -LRB- which allows you to buy new items without a deduction for depreciation if you have a claim -RRB- . Most of my customers add identity theft insurance to their policies so they can file a claim if they are the victim of identity theft . It will help restore incorrect info and pay attorney fees and some time off of work . In short , a basic policy wo n't cost much , but for a few extra dollars per month you can get much better coverage . What state are you in ? I may be able to help you . Send me an email !
Most people consider purchasing renter 's insurance to cover their personal belongings - most renter 's policies will pay for the loss of personal property due to theft , vandalism , fire , etc. . However , a renter 's policy can also provide coverage if you are personally liable for injury to another person or damage to their property due to a non-vehicle related incident . In addition , a renter 's policy may also pay for `` loss of use '' due to a covered loss , meaning if you are forced to temporarily relocate due to said loss , there may be coverage for related expenses . Renter 's insurance is typically very affordable . Premiums can vary from one person to another , and some companies may offer better prices than others depending on your location , but I 've seen renter 's policies as low as $ 9 or $ 10/month . Please bear in mind that there are a lot of variables that affect your rate , and you may or may not be able to find renter 's insurance for this kind of price .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Do I Need To Know When Buying Life Insurance ?
This is a good question . It 's not really a matter of what you need to know but rather what you want in a plan . What are you looking to accomplish ? Do you want to just cover final expenses or do you want to make sure the house and cars are paid off if you expire . You are welcome to contact us if you live in a state that we are licensed in and we can help you decide and enroll in a plan .
Here are three things you need to know when buying life insurance . 1 -RRB- You should know that -LRB- unless you are buying a simplified issue plan for which you are either approved or declined -RRB- , your premium may not be exactly as your agent quoted . 2 -RRB- You should know what guarantees your policy has . Is the premium locked in for x number of years ? Will the death benefit pay out at death at any age ? Etc. 3 -RRB- You should know that you have a month free look period to decide if you want to keep your policy , after it is issued . And if you pay anything before that , it can be refunded .
When purchasing life insurance it is always best , in my opinion , to sit down with a good experienced reputable agent and discuss your needs . There are a variety of products . While price is a consideration it should never be the deciding factor . If a product seems a lot cheaper than other like products there is a reason that you probably will not know about until it is too late . Consider these factors : What is the purpose of the insurance ? Is it to cover a long term need such as final expenses , or a short term need such as a mortgage ? You should use permanent insurance such as whole life to cover a long term need . Term insurance comes in all kinds of packages . One year term , 5 , 10 , 20 , and 30 are the most common . There is level term and decreasing term . Level term the death benefit stays level , decreasing term the death benefit decreases . Term insurance can be renewable or non renewable . It can be convertible to whole life or non convertible . In some term policies the rate can be adjusted according to the companies mortality history , thus it allows for premium increase . Term insurance premiums go up at each renewal . As you can see there are a variety of factors involved when buying life insurance . Unless you know and really do a lot of research on the different policies you may not purchase the best product that will meet your goals . A good independent insurance agent who specializes in life insurance and represents multiple companies can help you find the right product for your individual situation .
When purchasing life insurance , you need to know : 1 -RRB- That you are getting your policy with a secure company and reputable agent . 2 -RRB- The features of your policy and what they mean . 3 -RRB- What guarantees are included in your premium , return and coverage . 4 -RRB- Whether you qualify for that policy based on a thorough review of your health and other details . 5 -RRB- What type of policy best suits your financial needs .
The most important thing to know when buying life insurance is the agent with whom you are dealing . A great agent will listen carefully to you , will provide you with solid financial information and will communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . His job is to help you determine the level of coverage that you need and then arrange policies that will take care of that need and still stay within your budget .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
You want to find the structure that is going to be the most suitable to meet the needs you want to have covered . There 's a number of factors that you should think about when buying life insurance including : 1 -RRB- Why do you need the coverage ? 2 -RRB- How long do you need it ? 3 -RRB- What risk class do you qualify for ? -LRB- this is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Does the policy provide full coverage -LRB- payout whether death occurs by illness or injury - if you die by illness and you only have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What is the company 's financial rating ? - this is a big point when you 're looking at permanent coverage . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , send me a message - my contact information is provided on my profile . I do not charge fees for my input and can walk you through the entire process of securing a policy .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Nope . Life insurance can not be an investment . Think about this question for a second . What is the most essential element in an investment ? It is time . Some investments need time to mature . Other investments need time to increase in value . Example : if you are invested in the stock market , and your investment decreases in value , what should you do ? Should you sell ? Of course not . You would sustain the loss only if you redeem the shares at a lower price than when you bought them . What you should do is let them ride , and if properly managed , they should recoup their value , and then some . Over time . If you die , then you could pass this investment on to a family member , and that person could continue to manage the fund . It could continue to grow in value . Over time , during his or her lifetime . Does life insurance buy you this kind of time ? Absolutely not . The product is designed in just the opposite way . It assumes you will run out of time tomorrow . You get the biggest bang for the buck when a death benefit is paid immediately . Somebody could conceivably buy a policy today , pay one monthly premium , and then die . The beneficiary would receive the entire survivor benefit . Would you call something an investment if it required no time to realize value ? Nope . Or that is guaranteed to pay out , for that matter ? Lets talk about that guarantee for a second . Of all the forms of insurance you might buy , the only one you know for sure will pay a benefit is life insurance . This is because you know for sure you are going to die . You could buy medical insurance , but never get sick . You could buy disability insurance , but never get hurt . You could buy auto insurance , but never have a car accident . You could buy professional liability insurance , but never get sued . You could buy home insurance , but never have a fire . And on and on . However , if you hold on to that life insurance policy , you know your survivors will get paid . For sure . So , life insurance is a uniquely wonderful risk management tool that requires no time at all to realize value , and is absolutely guaranteed . With these characteristics , it meets nobodys definition of an investment . Now : I am sure you know that certain life insurance products can produce cash value . Whole life , universal life . Even term can carry a return of premium feature . But these funds are not to be considered investments . They should be seen as added value . As ways to partially offset your cost . As an extra benefit . They make the purchase of a policy extra attractive . But you should never assume that they will have time to grow . They will disappear as soon as a claim is filed and a benefit paid . And that could be tomorrow .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
Yes , more than likely you can , just like you can buy many insurance products on line . There are certainly arguments to be made for buying insurance that way and many major companies are including a `` direct line '' purchase option along with the more traditional distribution of products through a local licensed agency force . I know I myself am a licensed Professional Insurance adviser so I am biased , but it seems to me that we need to focus on what exactly we are buying when we make an insurance purchase . Sure , a policy is a document and a price is charged for what it represents , but i am convinced that most of us buy these things expecting that we 'll never have to use them , Hence the natural inclination to buy the cheapest . My opinion is that there are reasons to start your search on line , but talk to your local Insurance Professional for sound advice before buying anything .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Should Carry Long Term Care Insurance ?
Long Term Care is the elephant in the room . Many carriers have exited the market because they were not able to make money in this niche . The question you should be asking is what will happen if my spouse or I require care ? You will not find any good answer unless you have coverage or can afford the $ 70,000 per year plus that it costs . The changes of needing care are high , but not for a long period of time . In addition , there are several other ways of paying for long term care with life insurance and annuity riders that you should investigate .
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
AARP recently discontinued carrying Long Term Care Insurance . The American Association of Retired Persons still offers advice on how to purchase LTC insurance and may start carrying it again in the future . To obtain Long Term Care Insurance quotes elsewhere you can contact a local agency or search for brokers for Long Term Care Insurance on the internet who will shop several companies for you .
Under Medicare any type of Home Health Care is limited . They will provide some skilled care on a temporary basis but Medicare generally will not pay for custodial care in any long term care environment . That is why it is important to carry some type of Long Term Care Insurance that will provide Home Health Care . Some policies even pay family members for providing care . A good agent who does long term care planning can help you find a program that will help .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
No , actually these are two different types of insurance policies that cover two totally different events . Long term care insurance covers an individual in the event that they can no longer care for themselves . LTC pays for home health care , assisted living and nursing home care usually as a person ages . These policies should be considered in your late 50s or early 60s . Long term disability is an insurance policy that replaces earned income over a long period of time such as 10 , 20 , 30 years or age 65 or 67 years old . These policies should be purchased when the person goes to work for a living and carried until retirement age .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Under your current situation I would not carry the old disability policy . Disability insurance is a coordinated product in the sense that any number of policies will not pay more than the maximum scheduled amount usually no greater than 70 % The only reason to carry two different disability insurance policies is if you purchase a short term and a long term disability insurance policy . The long term policy may have an extended elimination period of 90 days or 180 days before benefits commence . A short term disability plan can commence within in days and pay benefits up to the elimination period of the long term plan . What you are describing sounds like two long term disability plan and would not make financial sense to keep the other policy .
People who have very few assets and/or income should probably not get long term care insurance . If there are immediate needs that will go unmet because you are concerned about a possible long term care stay in the future , then the cost of long term care insurance may not be worth it . Also , if you may perhaps go on Medicaid in the future , even without needing long term care services , you should not purchase long term care insurance , in most situations .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Who Is An Active Participant In A Retirement Plan ?
An active participant is anyone who is contributing -LRB- can contribute to the plan -RRB- . For employment plans , this would be anyone who is employed and has access to the plan . Generally employees who work a certain number of hours per year and who are at least 18 years old .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
what does Simple retirement plan mean ? It means that someone is using a boilerplate retirement plan created by the IRS to provide a retirement program for a small business . I love Simples as their name says it all . A Simple is a straight forward plan design with only a few requirements to comply with to have the plan . The best part for a small business owner is it costs next to nothing to provide . There is no testing of the plan which costs money . Just a nominal per head fee of active participants . The employer does n't pay fees for testing employees and accounting for employees who are n't in the plan . For a small business a Simple is a great choice for putting a retirement plan together for employees .
Which pension plan is best ? The best pension plan is the one you PARTICIPATE in . There are different plans used in both individual and business situation . The best really comes down to you choosing to set money aside in one of them for later retirement use . There is n't a best one , there is yours , be it an IRA or a 401k or if you 're lucky enough a defined benefit plan . The best is the one your actively in . Matching , vesting and such , do n't matter if you are n't participating .
An active participant is anyone who is contributing -LRB- can contribute to the plan -RRB- . For employment plans , this would be anyone who is employed and has access to the plan . Generally employees who work a certain number of hours per year and who are at least 18 years old .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Skydiving , BASE jumping , etc. , are hazardous activities that have been specifically excluded from any health insurance contract I can recall . Certainly you should check the exclusions and limitations section of your group or individual health insurance contract to verify this but there are commonly exclusions for participating in high risk/hazardous activities in both health and life insurance contracts . You would probably need to purchase a policy from a specialty risk carrier to assure your protection if you engage in these kinds of activities .
Yes - you can secure life insurance even if you skydive . However , every policy will ask you if you participate in any extreme or hazardous activities - this includes skydiving . When this is answered yes , they will likely ask you to complete a questionnaire to provide details . Some carriers will offer full coverage , but will charge a flat extra -LRB- an additional amount per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- . Some life insurance policies will cover skydivers -LRB- and death caused by skydiving -RRB- with a flat extra . This is an premium added onto the policy to cover the added risk incurred by being a skydiver . Some carriers will offer coverage , but require an exclusion rider -LRB- stating that if you die under this condition , the policy will not pay out the death benefit amount -RRB- . It may cost more for a program that will protect against death as a result of a skydiving incident , but it can be worth it - the choice is ultimately yours . Adjusting the face amount and/or term length are ways of reducing the premiums as well . When you 're no longer skydiving , you may want to look into re-writing your coverage to secure a more favorable premium structure - keep in mind , most carriers will generally look-back 2 years on these activities though.There are some simplified issue , non-medical , life insurance policies that do not ask about about extreme activities , but these programs will generally feature a substantially higher premium and the amount you can secure under a single policy will be limited . I would recommend consulting with an independent broker who can review options from multiple carriers because each company looks at skydiving in a different manner . If you have any other life insurance questions or would like help with your coverage , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or call me at 703-665-9133 .
Yes , it can affect what you pay for your life insurance . You can secure life insurance even if you skydive . However , every policy will ask you if you participate in any extreme or hazardous activities - this includes skydiving . When this is answered yes , they will likely ask you to complete a questionnaire to provide details . Some carriers will offer full coverage , but will charge a flat extra -LRB- an additional amount per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- . This is a premium added onto the policy to cover the added risk incurred by being a skydiver . Some carriers will offer coverage , but require an exclusion rider -LRB- stating that if you die under this condition , the policy will not pay out the death benefit amount -RRB- . It may cost more for a program that will protect against death as a result of a skydiving incident , but it can be worth it - the choice is ultimately yours . Adjusting the face amount and/or term length are ways of reducing the premiums as well . When you 're no longer skydiving , you may want to look into re-writing your coverage to secure a more favorable premium structure - keep in mind , most carriers will generally look-back 2 years on these activities though . There are some simplified issue , non-medical , life insurance policies that do not ask about about extreme activities , but these programs will generally feature a substantially higher premium and the amount you can secure under a single policy will be limited . I would recommend consulting with an independent broker who can review options from multiple carriers because each company looks at skydiving in a different manner .
Yes , it can affect what you pay for your life insurance . You can secure life insurance even if you skydive . However , every policy will ask you if you participate in any extreme or hazardous activities - this includes skydiving . When this is answered yes , they will likely ask you to complete a questionnaire to provide details . Some carriers will offer full coverage , but will charge a flat extra -LRB- an additional amount per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- or a lower risk class . This is a premium added onto the policy to cover the added risk incurred by being a skydiver . Others may only approve coverage withan exclusion rider -LRB- stating that if you die under this condition , the policy will not pay out the death benefit amount -RRB- . It may cost more for a program that will protect against death as a result of a skydiving incident , but it can be worth it - the choice is ultimately yours . Adjusting the face amount and/or term length are ways of reducing the premiums as well . When you 're no longer skydiving , you may want to look into re-writing your coverage to secure a more favorable premium structure - keep in mind , most carriers will generally look-back 2 years on these activities though.There are some simplified issue , non-medical , life insurance policies that do not ask about about extreme activities , but these programs will generally feature a substantially higher premium and the amount you can secure under a single policy will be limited . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker who can review options from multiple carriers because each company can assign a different risk class for skydivers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Which retirement plan is best for small business ? Personally , I like the SIMPLE retirement plan for use with small business . Why ? because it 's SIMPLE ! This IRS created plan is one of the most inexpensive plans out there for a small business . For the business owner the rules are simple and clear . NO testing , no ERISA planmath nonsense , no per head fees for all employees -LRB- including those that do n't participate -RRB- , in other words if you follow the IRS guidelines you save about $ 3k to $ 5k a year in administration fees . A simple involves matching -LRB- 3 % a minimum of 3 out of every 5 years or 1 % for those two years -RRB- employees who participate in the plan . While this may seem like a lot of moneyfor amatch . Think of it this way . You are rewarding your employees who stay with you , rather than a bunch of guys downtown who administer plans . Look closer into these retirement plans . They are easy to establish , easy to administer and extremely inexpensive to run .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
There are several steps that a retired person can take to increase their income . The first is to unretire . Retirement is overrated . Working has positive effects on a person and when the work is meaningful it can add years of enjoyment . It can certainly stretch your retirement budget . Even before you retire you can discuss this with your employer to determine if there is some way you can return to the workforce as either a consultant or contract worker . It would be best to determine which aspects of your work you enjoy and what type of projects you want to do . Enter into an agreement to work on those things that interest you . I know a teacher who shows up two periods of day to teach Physics and then gets in his car and drives home . He enjoys what he does and doesnt want to participate in the wider campus life . Sometimes it isnt possible to continue to work for your current employer . In those instances make an inventory of work in which you excel . Armed with that list contact people who need full or part-time help in your area of expertise and offer your services , or contract for your services . If you can not find an employer who needs your talents consider working for yourself . There are a variety of ways to advertise your skills and there are people looking for your talents . If you want to try something altogether new there are franchise opportunities available . These opportunities run the gamut from stores to on-line services and sales . Finding a program that suits your capabilities and temperament should be relatively easy . Some of these opportunities can become quite lucrative . I have clients who are leaving their employment long before retirement because their on-line sales business is flourishing . Obviously working provides income and it also reduces the number of years that you will depend upon your retirement savings to provide income . If you are drawing retirement income this will give you money which you can put into a Roth IRA to fund the period when you finally do stop working altogether . One of the most important things that working does is to allow you to delay receiving social security . For a long list of reasons it is usually to a retirees advantage to delay the start of benefits until they reach age 70 . The increase in benefits is substantial to the worker and to the widow it is amazing . Working provides a great deal of emotional satisfaction and a sense of freedom . Another technique to increase your retirement income is to tap into the equity of your home . Regardless of whether the mortgage is paid or not , you can take out a reverse mortgage after age 62 . A reverse mortgage will allow you to tap the equity in your home . This is a complex transaction and the only transaction that I can think of where an applicant must be counselled by a disinterested party . It is the right move for some , though and could make your retirement more comfortable . Another way to stretch your retirement dollars is to determine what you own of value that you no longer need . If what you own can be converted to cash it might help stretch your retirement income assets . Selling things on the internet is relatively inexpensive and can be quite fruitful . I advertised an accordion on the internet and was besieged with interested buyers . Estate sales demonstrate that there are things that are not being used by the retirees that are of interest to the public . Often cars are no longer being used , undeveloped land lies idle and jewelry lies unused in a safe deposit box . Another way to stretch your retirement income is to determine what services are available to seniors in your location that cost you money currently . Many places offer discounts and sometimes services can be free . Even utilities companies participate in programs to lower costs for seniors . With almost 50 % of retirees depending on Social Security for their retirement income it is very important to understand how you can stretch that income and even increase it .
No , Nationwide no longer offers Health insurance for individuals . The company does offer specialty accidentcoverage plans under the `` Group Protector '' program , however , for amateur sports teams , camp and conferenceprograms , ROTC/JROTC , Auxiliary police and fire , special events , travel , recreation activities , youth groups , and others . We offer both Primary -LRB- first to pay -RRB- and secondary -LRB- next to pay -RRB- plans . All group participants are automatically covered . Accidental death and specific loss -LRB- loss of limb , sight , hearing -RRB- benefits included . GrouProtector provides accident medical insurance and accidental death insurance for community groups and special events in the event of an accidental injury or death during a sponsored group activity .
People who participate in high risk activities or have impaired health conditions often are charged much higher premiums for life insurance , whether they are applying for term or permanent coverage . The price that you pay is determined by your age , the requested amount of coverage , and risk classification . If the carrier offers a substandard/table-rating for the coverage , the premiums will usually be based off of the standard risk class with an extra 25 % increase for each extra letter assigned -LRB- the 25 % figure can vary by carrier - e.g. some may use 17 % , etc. -RRB- . For example , a Table B rating would cost the standard rate plus 50 % -LRB- B = 2 tables -RRB- , a Table D rating would cost double the standard rate -LRB- D = 4 tables -RRB- , etc. . Insurance companies may also look at assigning a flat extra rating with a specified cost per thousand dollars of insurance -LRB- such as $ 5.00 per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- . Flat extras may be applied for only a few years , or for the life of the policy and are more commonly assigned for high-risk activities . Table-ratings are more commonly given for high-risk health conditions . I often also see many people just apply for a bunch of companies at the same time because they 're a high-risk individual . DO NOT do this ! . Applying for coverage with more than one company at the same time could hurt your chances of securing a policy . It is in your best interest to find out before applying what the most likely offer will be from 10-15 different companies so that you know what to expect and know that you are getting the best possible offer . I highly recommend working with an independent agent who can look at multiple companies for you - trying to get that information can be very difficult to do on your own . This is the exact field my group specializes in and would be happy to be of assistance with your program .
In 1959 , Congress passed the Federal Employees Health Benefits Act -LRB- FEHBA -RRB- . Its primary purpose was to attract & retain talented personnel to compete with the private sector . It is made available to both active & retired workers . Congress participates in the FEBHA . Currently , the FEBHA offers about 300 different plans with a `` defined contribution '' approach ; wherethe better the benefits the more the cost to the employee . The plans are definitely better than private sector insurance and where the private sector has virtually eliminated retiree benefits , the FEBHA has not . So , member of congress that serves just one term would be eligible for the benefits for remainder of his/her life . It is not necessarily special to them , but it is different and probably a much better plan than the average American would have access to plus it can be carried throughout the retirement years .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Whole Life Insurance The Same As Universal ?
Think of it as apples and fruit . Universal is a type ofpermanent life insurance . But there are other types of permanent life insurance . Whole life is another type of permanent life insurance . Whole life is a fixed product , whose premium never varies , and whose value increases over time , based on the carrier 's investments in your fixed account . Universal is permanent , and will never end , so long as you continue to pay , unlike term whose premiums will increase after the end of a fixed term . However , with universal , the policy value may go up or may go down , based on whatever it is pegged to reflect . It is possible with universal that you may have to put more money in that expected , if the market were to take a serious hit . This would not happen with whole life . A way to avoid this is to buy indexed universal life . It allows the policy to grow with the market , but at a somewhat lower rate , but it prevents the policy to lose money when the market goes down , as it locks in the balance annually . Over time , this actually can give you a better return than a standard universal , even in an overall good market , not just a bad one . Talk to your agent . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
There are five types of permanent life insurance policies : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . Participating whole life and guaranteed universal life are used for indemnification planning . Participating whole life , with a max term rider and paid up additions rider can be used for income as can current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . The income design must conform to TAMRA and minimize the death benefit amount to optimize the crediting methodology .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
I 'll add a bit to what Jeff has said because he made a very important point about Universal Life , that it 's a hybrid of whole life and term . Both whole life and Universal Life build cash value and have a separate portion that 's purely death benefit , but they differ greatly in how they operate internally . I 'll follow with explaining this difference . I 'm going to speak somewhat generally , so do n't kill me if a particular company 's product behaves a little differently . Whole Life - The internal cost of insurance is averaged over your life expectancy and stays the same year after year . Therefore , every year , the same amount of money goes toward the cost of insurance . The remainder goes to the cash account which grows by the insurance company adding money , or dividends , to the account . These dividends are set by the company based on the performance of it 's investments . It can change every year but most companies will guarantee a certain dividend . Premiums are level throughout the life of the policy and , if you pay your premium , your policy is guaranteed to be there for you . Universal Life - The internal cost of insurance increases every year based on your age just like term insurance does . The remainder goes into a cash account that the insurance company adds to as interest . This interest rate is also tied to the performance of their investments and will change from year to year . This means that , at the beginning of the policy , the internal cost of insurance is the lowest it will ever be and will increase every year . Premiums are flexible with a minimum amount due to cover expenses and the cost of insurance . Remainder goes into the cash account . There good and bad with both . With Whole life , your premiums will usually start out higher than with Universal , but they 'll never change and your policy is guaranteed to be there as long as you pay the premium . With Universal Life , the minimum premium will be much lower at inception but will increase every year as the cost insurance rises . This makes it extremely important to pay a target premium or more with universal life . That way , more money goes into the cash account to earn interest and offset cost of insurance increases as you get older . You can put more into the cash account and , therefore , it can grow more quickly , but there 's a flip side to that also . if you underfund it , the increasing cost of insurance can eat up all the cash value in later years and leave you with no cash and no death benefit . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and go through the entire process so he/she can put together the right program for you and your family .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
While both universal life and whole life insurance are permanent products and have a death benefit the similarities end there . Whole life insurance has a guarantee premium for the life of the contract and generally is credited by a dividend or return of unused premium . Universal life gas four policy types : current assumption universal life , guaranteed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . With the exception of guaranteed universal life , the others have flexible premiums or death benefit that can be changed by the policy owner .
The only type of life insurance that you can borrow from is Universal Life or Whole Life . You can not borrow from Term Life . There are many types of Universal Life and Whole Life , and especially with Universal Life , some policies will have very little cash value . If you are purchasing a Universal Life policy for the purpose of borrowing from it , you will do best with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life .
No universal life insurance is not whole life insurance . The two products have some very distinct differences . Universal life insurance has no specific premium like whole life insurance , meaning the premium paid can be increased or decreased within a very liberal range at the policy-owners discretion . Whole life insurance guarantees that if the calculated premiums are paid in full then the original death benefit will remain in force until the insured reaches the date of maturity -- universal life insurance makes no such guarantee . Expenses assumed within a whole life policy are fixed at issue and can never change . Expenses assumed within a universal life policy can be increased or decreased by the insurer as real operating experience allows .
Universal life insurance is a type of permanent life insurance program that features a flexible premium structure.It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making itmuch less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value . It 's ideal foranyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value -LRB- the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy -RRB- . You can guarantee benefits for up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life is designed to last your whole life . Your premiums will cover the the cost of insurance protection until the day you die , or else pay you the money in a lump sum if you do not die by a certain age . Whole Life also has a savings component that allows you to borrow from the cash value , if you desire . Universal Life also has the components of insurance protection -LRB- death benefit -RRB- plus savings -LRB- cash value -RRB- . But UL can be designed in a multitude of ways , and it can be further adjusted while the policy is in existence . E.g. . You might want your Universal Life policy to have a large face amount when your children are in the home , but then reduce the face amount to simply pay for final expenses when you are older . You have the flexibility to do that with Universal Life . Not only that , but when you reduce the face amount , you might be able to also reduce or quit paying premiums . Or you can keep paying the same premium and cause your policy to build up extra cash value . A word of caution when buying Universal Life . It is called permanent life insurance , but it is not guaranteed to be permanent unless you choose a UL policy that states that guarantee . Thankfully , there are guaranteed no lapse UL policies on the market ; even those where you can `` dial '' the guarantee to make the policy last to whatever age you choose . As with Whole Life , if you borrow from the policy , you must pay the money back with interest to ensure that your death benefit will be paid per the terms of the contract .
Life Insurance is a mortality product constructed to cover temporary -LRB- term insurance -RRB- or permanent -LRB- permanent insurance -RRB- financial liabilities . Is your financial liability temporary or perpetual ? Term life insurance is generally offered in increments of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life polices can cover you to age 121 and has five policy types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . There are three major planning categories for life insurance : indemnification , income and inheritance . First , determine which planning category you need . If the planning category is indemnification and/or inheritance then determine is the need temporary or permanent ? The solution is either term or guaranteed universal life insurance . If the planning category is income , life insurance can be a supplemental retirement alternative . Here 's some product alternatives : current assumption universal life insurance with three crediting methods : interest rates , indices and separate sub account performance using the lowest TAMRA compliant death benefit option . For income , you may also want to look at TAMRA compliant lowest death benefit , participating whole life , with a max term rider and a paid up additions rider .
There are many choices of life insurance available to you . The main stream life insurance products are term life , universal life , variable life and whole life . Each one has a specific purpose . Term life insurance is meant to coverage a specific period of time . The common terms are 1-5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . This means the rate or premium you purchase is guaranteed level for that period of time regardless of change in health , life style or occupation . Term life is commonly used for younger people starting out in life , covering a large debt , life a mortgage on a home or business debt , or covering for a young child 's education . term life insurance allows for the largest face amount for the smallest premium payments . Universal life and variable life are permanent life insurance solutions that build cash value . Typically the premiums are more expensive and the face amounts are less because part of the premium is going into a cash value fund that can be invested with numerous options . The cash value can later be used for retirement , college funds , critical or chronic illness or even to purchase a large asset like a home . The universal and variable options are typically more aggressive with the cash value funds . The last option , whole life insurance , is very similar to the previous universal life insurance options . However , the cash value funds are typically a fixed percentage of growth . Whole life as it 's name suggests is primarily meant to cover you for your entire life . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker with numerous carriers to shop the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
There are two types of life insurance : Term and Permanent life insurance . Term life insurance is for a time certain period of coverage to indemnify your beneficiaries from financial liability . Permanent life insurance is for ongoing financial liabilities that may never terminate . Depending upon your age term life insurance issues at guaranteed periods of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life insurances can mature up to age 121 and some polices actually isle the life of the insured . Permanent life insurance can be classified into two categories : Par whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life has four policy platforms : Guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life .
First you need to understand that there are a number of variations on Permanent or Whole Life Insurance . Universal , Indexed Universal , Variable Universal , and straight Whole Life are all `` Permanent Life '' insurance . That said , I would answer your question by saying that Whole Life Insurance is Always a good idea ! From there it needs to be determined what you range of objectives are to determine which type will be best for you . As mentioned above Whole Life is Cash Value insurance that grows cash value tax free at a minimum guaranteed rate . The exceptions are the variable and universal varieties , which are subject to stock market variations and cost increases .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Long Can I Be On My Parents Health Insurance ?
Under the Affordable Care Act , if your plan covers children , you can add or keep your children on your health insurance policy until they turn 26 years old . There is one temporary exception : Until 2014 , `` grandfathered '' group plans do not have to offer dependent coverage up to age 26 if a young adult is eligible for group coverage outside their parents plan . Also , I would check with the state in which you live . For example , Florida enacted legislation in 2008 that allows dependent children to continue their dependent coverage up to the end of the calendar year in which they turn 30 years old , based on eligibility guidelines .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
If you have individual health insurance the answer is definitely - NO . If you are covered under an employer 's group health plan the answer is almost always No as well . However , there is a very narrow circumstance where you might be able to add a parent onto your group coverage . I 've never seen it in real life but here 's how I understand it could be approached . First , you have to determine if your parent qualifies as a dependent under IRS guidelines . IRS guidelines say that if your parent is under age 65 , they have an annual income of less than $ 3650 and you pay more than half of your parent 's total support for the year you can claim them as a dependent . As you can see , these a some pretty hard criteria to meet but I 'm sure there have to be some people out there that fit this profile . Next , you will have to have a serious meeting with your employer and have family coverage available through your employer 's health plan . You ca n't add your parent as an individual . If your current coverage level is employee only you would have to change it to a level where two or more adults can be covered -LRB- e.g. - family coverage -RRB- . You must be prepared to provide documentation -LRB- tax filings , etc. -RRB- to your employer to support your request and , in all candor , I 'd visit with a family lawyer before meeting with your employer . It is highly likely that your HR person or the business owner has never been presented with this situation before and it 's such a rare situation that in some ways it defies common sense and is at odds with what is commonly accepted business personnel practices . Until your question prompted me to do some research my initial reaction was `` no way '' and I 've been in the business for 30 years . You should n't expect this to be easy to accomplish , you may have to be the educator and you may find yourself having to deal with your employer , their insurance broker/consultant and probably the health insurance carrier themselves and to be expecting resistance every step of the way .
The best place to start in purchasing life insurance for a parent is to discuss the idea with them . They will , at a minimum , need to sign the application , so you can not do it without their knowledge . If they apply for a small , simplified issue policy , they will probably need to do a phone interview with the insurance company . If applying for a larger policy , they will need to take a life insurance exam that my include an EKG and questions to test their cognitive function . If they are not willing to participate in the application process in any way , they can get guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- but will still need to sign the application -RRB- . In this first conversation , you can get an idea of what type of policy to look for by asking them how involved they want to get in the application process . At this time , you should also get a list of their medications and current and past health conditions . Most adult children are unaware of their parents ' complete health history . If your parent does not want to share that with you , they should contact an agent themselves , for their quote . You can find the most competitive rates for your parent at agencies that sell a selection of products . If the policy is going to be under $ 50,000 , there are agencies that specialize in those . The agency may call that type of policy Senior Life , as our agency does . Or they may call it Burial Insurance , Funeral Insurance , or Final Expense Insurance . If you are looking for a larger face amount , contact an agency that is experienced in Senior Life Insurance . If your parent has very serious health issues , Guaranteed Issue may be the way to go . Most companies will allow a child to pay for a policy for their parent . Whether or not you can own the policy will depend on a variety of factors . If you approach the purchase with the preparation explained above , it can be a very easy process and leave your parent feeling fulfilled , rather than frustrated .
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
In what way do you mean ? As a college funding choice , possibly , but it would require significant investment that might be better spent on the parents to insure college . A life insurance policy on a child is a good idea for several reasons . Set up properly it is a financial cornerstone to a sound financial portfolio beginning for a child as they grow into adulthood . Imagine locking in a price that is extremely low and having it gain in value over the years into adulthood . Add the option of guaranteed insurability to the plan and you 've taken away the ability for an insurance company to say `` no '' to your child in the future . That is extremely valuable . Now , let 's look at the sad side of insurance on a child . What if you need it ? As heartbreaking as it would be to lose a child , imagine having to figure out what you can `` afford '' for a service or headstone ? Imagine how much time you 'll need off of work and what your employer would cover salary wise ? For the same reason I purchased insurance as a young single man , long before I went into this business , I did n't want a double or triple whammy for my parents who would already be dealing with my death . Throw lost wages in there and having to find the money to bury me and I 've created devastation in my household . While may God forbid , if you were to lose a child , is n't that enough ?
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
Life insurance underwriting gives a lot of latitude to the definition of dependent . Its actually pretty interesting . I think this is because the whole principle of insurable interest implies a certain dependency . It is this principle that is the bottom line as to whether or not the company accepts the beneficiary designation on a submitted application . So who really can be dependent on the insured financially , and thereby qualify as a beneficiary on his or her policy ? Certainly a spouse . Does the spouse have to be working ? No . Can the spouse be rich and independently wealthy ? Yes . They still can be considered financially interdependent . Kids ? For sure . Minors ? Of course . How about children that are of legal age ? Well , they certainly could still be financially dependent on their parents . To some extent . -LRB- Until their parents boot them out of the nest :-RRB- Parents ? Yes . That is very common these days . Elder parents become dependent on their grown children financially . Sad to see , but it happens all the time . Other family members ? Could be . How many times do you see a family taking in a niece , nephew , cousin , aunt , or uncle ? Then you have the whole realm of domestic partners . Same sex . Opposite sex . Older man , younger woman . Older woman , younger man . As long as they have some kind of financial independence shared accounts , etc. they could be named as beneficiaries . And we havent even talked about how businesses can be dependent on people , as well as charities . Interesting , dont you think ?
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
If your parent is age 65 or older , they qualify for Medicare so you can not typically add them onto your healthcare coverage at that point . Depending on the particular health plan you are enrolled in , you may or may not be able to add your parent onto that plan . Check the summary page in your health plan and see what it says or you can check with your health plan administrator to confirm whether they allow parents as dependents on your family plan . If your health plan allows this , here are other qualifications you will have to meet with the IRS . You must already be claiming your parent as a dependent on your federal tax filing . The IRS dependent qualifications include : Your parent is under age 65 , makes under $ 3650 per year gross income , you provide more than half of your parents ' support for the year .
At what age can you get life insurance ? Usually `` you '' can purchase life insurance from the age of 18 on . Life insurance is considered a contract and in order to have a binding contract both parties must be of legal age . An insurance company can not contract with a 10 year old or a 15 year old legally . So how did my kids get life insurance before age ten ? Because I `` own '' the policies as their parent . I had an insurable interest to insure my kids and I went into a contract with an insurance carrier . My kids are simply the insured and because at the time of purchase they were not of age to be party to a legal contract , they can only be the insured until 18 and I could sign over ownership at that point in time .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is The Best Health Insurance You Can Buy ?
Although there are several ways to qualify `` best '' , I will try to adress some of the most popular views of what would be best . If you are refering to the best coverage then a `` Platnum '' plan - 90 % coinsurance coverage from the insurance company , with little to no deductable , this type of coverage would be structured as a PPO plan . If you are refering to the best coverage at the lowest cost then a Consumer Directed Health Plan would be the best way to ballance the two opposing variables . CDHP 's are health insurance policies that combine a variety of different structuring options -LRB- PPO , POS , HMO , etc. . -RRB- , however they have a high deductable that must be meet before the policies coinsurance would cover many medical services -LRB- except for routine , and preventitive care -RRB- . The high deductable reduces the cost of the plan and is offset by a Medical Savings/Expense account .
It will depend upon what level of health insurance you purchase . Assuming you purchase major medical health insurance , it will now have to be in compliance with the Affordable Care Act . That said , what you may be purchasing can range from a `` Platinum '' level plan with very low out-of-pocket expenses for virtually all areas of health care to a `` Bronze '' plan that may not provide you any coverage at all until you have paid for more than $ 6000 in health care expenses out of your own pocket . One thing that is consistent across the four levels of health insurance plans now available -LRB- Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum -RRB- is that a wide range of preventive health care services will be covered at 100 % with no cost sharing by the subscriber . Yes , you are also buying `` peace of mind '' that in the event of a serious illness or injury that your personal financial exposure is limited to that $ 6000 + number each year -LRB- which will increase in future years -RRB- and you also are now buying guaranteed access to health insurance with no pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . In the abstract I think everyone agrees that these are good things . However , depending upon your income level what you may be buying may or may not be viewed by the individual as affordable to them . Having recently completed the first open enrollment season under ObamaCare it has surprised me how many people , even ones qualifying for substantial subsidies of their monthly health insurance premiums , still elected to remain uninsured . Clearly , the perceived value proposition of what you get from buying health insurance has a very subject answer that varies greatly from one person to the next .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
You should talk with an independent life insurance agent so they can review options from multiple carriers with you , help identify the risk class you 're looking at with various carriers -LRB- a critical part when looking for coverage -RRB- , and identify the policy structure that will best serve your needs and your budget . It 's also highly , highly recommended that you do NOT apply to a bunch of carriers at the same time just to see what sticks - this can be a red flag to many carriers and they 'll want to know what your plans are with each policy , total amount of coverage you plan on keeping , as well as the underwriting results from them . There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you .
The best time to buy life insurance is the day before you die . That way you wo n't pay a penny more than you have to for your coverage ! What 's that you say ? You do n't know the day you are going to die ? Hmmm ... well then , the answer is easy : The best time to buy life insurance is now . Assuming you have a need -LRB- or a desire -RRB- for life insurance coverage , you are best served buying it sooner rather than later . Term life insurance rates are as inexpensive as they will ever be , and they will only get more expensive as you grow older . If you are interested in cash value insurance , it 's even more important that you buy it sooner rather than later . Find yourself a qualified agent and work with him or her to design a program of life insurance coverage that will address your needs and keep your overall costs down .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
If you have good health , that is always the best time to buy life insurance . It is cheaper when you have good health . If you have poor health , that is a good reason to buy life insurance . People with poor health need that protection . So good health or poor health , now is a good time to buy life insurance .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
The first step in buying life insurance is to determine how much coverage you need , what type of insurance will work best for your needs , and how much it will cost . With life insurance you can not just pick out the policy with the features that you like . You must qualify medically , and your overall mortality risk -LRB- or lack thereof -RRB- determines your rate . What company you use and the type of policy you choose also figure into the premium you will pay . So the best way to buy life insurance is to talk to an agent who can help you determine how much you need , explain what types of policies work best for that need , and then shop around to find the best rate for which you qualify . Good life insurance agencies stick with you and guide you through to the time when the policy you want is in your safe , ready to go into action if tragedy strikes . While a life insurance agent is the last person most people wish to consult , in the end , most policies require an agent as the middle person , anyway . Starting out by calling an honest agent can make the process very simple and help you save hundreds of dollars .
The answer has two distinct parts to it . Part One : You can only purchase life insurance on someone you have an `` insurable interest '' in . This means you have some financial interest in them continuing to live . Such as a spouse , a child , a business associate , or some relative with whom you may be in some manner financially associated with . Part Two : Not everyone can have life insurance , except for the `` Guaranteed '' type insurance , which is for relatively low amounts of death benefit , and a relatively high premium . This may come through a group plan or a general advertisement.For the other types of life insurance , your health will be checked , unless you are a member of a group doing open enrollment , where the premiums are averaged out among sick and healthy members . After a health check , the company will make an offer of what they will charge and what death benefit they will offer . You may not get what you hoped for . Your best bet is to do everything you can to make sure your health exam will find you in the best health possible . Do not lie . They will find out . The company with the lowest rate is not always the one with the best coverage . Keep the reputation of the company in mind . Always best to go with the best life insurance company you can find who will cover you . Gary Lane 9497972424 .
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not make it easier to buy a Medigap Plan . If you have a pre-existing health condition , the insurance companies can turn you down . Therefore , the best time to buy a Medigap plan is when you think you do n't need one . If you are over 65 and out of your initial Open Enrollment Period , you will have to answer the health questions on the Medigap application . Each insurance company is unique with their health questions -- as is each person with their health history . While one insurance carrier might deny you for having rheumatoid arthritis , another insurance company may approve your application . That is why it 's a great idea to work with a Medicare Supplement specialist . In just a few minutes , we can review your health history and determine which insurance companies may be the best match for you . If I can assist you with your personal Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
To buy life insurance wisely , I agree with Jason ; find a broker you can trust and work hand in hand with them to arrive at the best policy for your needs , at the best price for your age and health . It helps to know what you are looking for , but sometimes your best choices do not match up with what research suggests . That is because life insurance is a highly individualized purchase . Your needs and your health factors make a huge impact on what will work best for you . Only a broker who is honestly looking out for you , and who has access to a number of choices , and knows how to discern which you will qualify for , can help you sift through it all to make a wise decision .
Yes , more than likely you can , just like you can buy many insurance products on line . There are certainly arguments to be made for buying insurance that way and many major companies are including a `` direct line '' purchase option along with the more traditional distribution of products through a local licensed agency force . I know I myself am a licensed Professional Insurance adviser so I am biased , but it seems to me that we need to focus on what exactly we are buying when we make an insurance purchase . Sure , a policy is a document and a price is charged for what it represents , but i am convinced that most of us buy these things expecting that we 'll never have to use them , Hence the natural inclination to buy the cheapest . My opinion is that there are reasons to start your search on line , but talk to your local Insurance Professional for sound advice before buying anything .
Nope . Life insurance can not be an investment . Think about this question for a second . What is the most essential element in an investment ? It is time . Some investments need time to mature . Other investments need time to increase in value . Example : if you are invested in the stock market , and your investment decreases in value , what should you do ? Should you sell ? Of course not . You would sustain the loss only if you redeem the shares at a lower price than when you bought them . What you should do is let them ride , and if properly managed , they should recoup their value , and then some . Over time . If you die , then you could pass this investment on to a family member , and that person could continue to manage the fund . It could continue to grow in value . Over time , during his or her lifetime . Does life insurance buy you this kind of time ? Absolutely not . The product is designed in just the opposite way . It assumes you will run out of time tomorrow . You get the biggest bang for the buck when a death benefit is paid immediately . Somebody could conceivably buy a policy today , pay one monthly premium , and then die . The beneficiary would receive the entire survivor benefit . Would you call something an investment if it required no time to realize value ? Nope . Or that is guaranteed to pay out , for that matter ? Lets talk about that guarantee for a second . Of all the forms of insurance you might buy , the only one you know for sure will pay a benefit is life insurance . This is because you know for sure you are going to die . You could buy medical insurance , but never get sick . You could buy disability insurance , but never get hurt . You could buy auto insurance , but never have a car accident . You could buy professional liability insurance , but never get sued . You could buy home insurance , but never have a fire . And on and on . However , if you hold on to that life insurance policy , you know your survivors will get paid . For sure . So , life insurance is a uniquely wonderful risk management tool that requires no time at all to realize value , and is absolutely guaranteed . With these characteristics , it meets nobodys definition of an investment . Now : I am sure you know that certain life insurance products can produce cash value . Whole life , universal life . Even term can carry a return of premium feature . But these funds are not to be considered investments . They should be seen as added value . As ways to partially offset your cost . As an extra benefit . They make the purchase of a policy extra attractive . But you should never assume that they will have time to grow . They will disappear as soon as a claim is filed and a benefit paid . And that could be tomorrow .
Who does not have to buy health insurance ? Well , no one has to buy health insurance . You simply pay a tax for your decision not to . Also if you decide not to buy health insurance and you have a need later on you can only buy health insurance during an open enrollment window . So you could be very much out of luck to save a few dollars . Entirely your choice .
Where is the best place to buy life insurance ? In Washington state it would be my office of course ! ;-RRB- Actually the best place to buy life insurance can vary . It could be online , on the phone or at an office . What you 're looking for is a agent who can answer your questions in such a way that you understand it . The agents role is not to speak to you in such a way that you are left scratching your head later over what was said . Big words , fancy charts do not make a good agent . A good agent translates the information you want into a way you understand , a poor one speaks over your head and bluffs their way through . I knew of an agent who used to produce a boiler plate document that was about two pounds of paper , of which two pages were actually about the client . The rest was fluff . He made a lot of sales that way because the clients were impressed by the volume presented , not the quality of information . The best place to buy is the place that actually answers your questions in a way that you understand and reduces the background noise as best as possible .
There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for.This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you would like assistance or have any questions about life insurance , send me a private message . You can also visit my website , www.TermInsuranceBrokers.com , for input as well .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is Personal Liability In Home Insurance ?
Personal liability is what protects you from lawsuit if someone is injured on your property . We live in a litigious society , unfortunately , making higher limits of liability necessary . I recommend at least $ 300,000 for the average homeowner and more if you live in an upscale neighborhood . It is a protection for you and the cost is not that great .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Adequate home insurance coverage is very important , and the discussion should be had with a professional independent agent . The best way to answer this question is to provide some general information for the primary/main coverage types on the home insurance policy -LRB- please note that each state and company policy coverages and requirements vary . This is why it is important to review in detail with your professional independent agent -RRB- . Dwelling value : this is the coverage limit that protects the structure/dwelling . Ideally , this coverage limit needs to be set at the proper replacement cost valuation . In the event of a total loss -LRB- fire , tornado ... -RRB- , what is the amount of insurance coverage on your dwelling that you would need to get you back in that exact same house?The answer to this question is the dwelling amount coverage limit that your home insurance policy should have . Personal property/contents coverage limit : this is the coverage that provides protection for your personal belongings . It is suggested to take pictures of your belongings -LRB- especially your more valuable items -RRB- as well as have copies of the pictures and any receipts to provide proof of ownership in the event of a claim . Again , like with the dwelling value we discussed above , the question here is what is the value of all of your items in your house ? Or , what would thecost be toget everythingwhat you have now in your house if a fire or tornado destroyed it all?The answer to this question is the personal property contents limit that your home insurance policy should have . Also - please note that if you have a mortgage on your home , most often the lender will require the loan amount or 100 % ofthecalculated structurereplacement value to be the required dwelling coverage amount.This amount can vary , and to ensure that you are getting the coverage protection you need without overinsuring , please review with your local professional independent agent . Liability coverage/medical pay to others : this is about the least-expensive part of a home insurance policy , but it is very important to have . The minimal amount of liability coverage suggested to have for this coverage category is $ 300,000 , although usually the bump up in coverage to the $ 500,000 liability limit is usually very small . And , the medical payments to others coverage should be at $ 5000 . These coverages protect you from injury that an unrelated -LRB- visitor -RRB- sustains while on your property , or that you are deemed to be liabile -LRB- responsible -RRB- for . Please note that these are just a couple of the important insurance coverages that are included on your home insurance . There are many other coverages that might be included with the policy that you choose or there might be other suggested coverages that you can add to your home policy that gives you the extra coverage protection that you need . There is not a general coverage limit or value that is used for determining the proper coverages for your home insurance . Every client is different and so are their needs . Make sure that you review what your needs and coverage requirements are , and let an independent agent create a policy specifically for you and your needs .
A swimming pool is an attractive luxury and may in many ways enhance the sales value of your home , but your insurance company factors it as a possible risk . Homes are insured based on reconstruction value and relative risk to the insuring carrier . A swimming pool can pose a threat to the carrier since there lies the possibility of danger and a personal liability . It is more likely that a child or impaired adult may become injured in or by the pool rather than your home being destroyed by fire . In most cities around the country , there is an ordinance in force requiring homeowners to have swimming pools within a fenced yard protected by a latched gate so not to invite strangers to the use of the pool without the owner 's permission and knowledge ; insurance companies all impose the condition that a swimming pool is in a fenced and gated area without public access . Even though the swimming pool poses a greater liability risk , most insurance carriers do not assess an increase in premium ; however , they will always ask if you have a diving board and/or slide . The diving board and slide pose a much greater risk than the swimming pool itself . Some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board , slide or a trampoline in the yard . For homeowners with a swimming pool , it is highly recommended to carry the highest available personal liability insurance limit ; most likely $ 500,000 , in most States , there is no deductible applicable to the liability portion of the policy and the premium is unlikely to cost more than $ 40 - $ 80 per year for the additional liability insurance coverage . If this topic is of greater concern , you may purchase a Personal Umbrella Policy which in most cases will provide an Excess Form of liability up to $ 5 Million of coverage for a separate premium .
Homeowners Insurance consists of Dwelling Coverage -LRB- Home -RRB- , Other Structures , Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- , Loss of Use and Personal Liability Coverage . To answer the question , the Dwelling Coverage should be sufficient to rebuild the home from the ground up following a covered total loss ; this would be a total reconstruction estimate to rebuild the home . Most insurance carriers have a method of calculating the replacement cost of a dwelling based on the characteristics input when you request the initial quotation ; in most cases , this is a safe number to properly insure the home . Regarding Personal Liability Insurance , it is a good idea to purchase the maximum limit available since this coverage is very inexpensive and is not subject to any deductible . Most carriers offer a maximum limit of $ 500,000 for Personal Liability . If in the process of purchasing the necessary coverage , the consumer is attempting to generate a lower premium charge , it would be a good idea to accept a high deductible which will prove to offer a much lower premium with relatively low risk to the insured . There is a system available to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States . An exemplary online experience for all with the ability to select different options and adjust your home insurance quote as necessary . WEBSITELINK
-- > Normal 0 Of course , the most important issue to consider before selecting any insurance company is be certain they are financially sound and able to back up the promises they make in their insurance policies . Beyond that , for a homeowners policy consider what you are looking for . Why even consider any agent or insurance company if they are unwilling or unable to offer the coverage you want and need ? So , what do you want your home policy to do ? Rebuild your home if it is destroyed ? Pay you to replace your personal property if it is damaged or destroyed ? Defend you and pay a judgment if you are sued for injuring someone or damaging his or her property ? If so , Id suggest looking for an insurer that offers : Guaranteed Replacement Cost Coverage on your home . Many companies dont . Most insurance companies will pay you to rebuild your house but they will stop paying when you limit is reached . Following a major storm , wild fire or other disaster , building materials and available labor become scarce . Prices increase and consumers find they may not have enough insurance . Guaranteed Replacement Cost Coverage automatically increases your limit to whatever you need to rebuild your home , even if it is double or triple the amount of insurance you carry . Replacement Cost and Special Coverage on your personal property . Most homeowners policies limit coverage on your personal property to a number of specific named perils . Look for insurers who offer Special Coverage , often referred to as all - risk , replacement cost coverage not only on your home but your personal property as well . Personal Liability coverage is an important yet often overlooked part of your homeowners policy . Many families include high limit Personal Umbrella coverage as part of their insurance program . Personal Umbrellas are often considered the least expensive way to purchase high personal liability limits . In addition , these policies should have broader insuring agreements with fewer exclusions and limitations than standard home and auto policies . If these features are available , I would then consider the annual premium and possibly the availability of a local agent who is committed to assisting you should you have a problem .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
-- > Normal 0 You may first want to ask yourself the question , why am I buying homeowners insurance in the first place ? The most common answer is , should my home be damaged or destroyed , Id like to have enough money to fix or replace it . So that is a good place to start . How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? Its not an easy number to come up with but there are free tools available on the Internet to assist you with this effort -LRB- Google-Residential Replacement Cost Calculators -RRB- . Insurance companies normally do their own replacement cost estimates and will suggest or require certain minimum limits for specific types of coverage . Your lender , if you have one , may also have coverage requirements so your ultimate decision will be a combination of these factors . Just remember , you are the one buying the coverage and paying the premium . Make sure your needs and expectations are considered . The actual cost to rebuild your home will vary depending on local conditions following your loss . Hurricanes , tornadoes , wild fires and the like cause devastation to entire areas . Contractors , labor and materials may not be available at normal costs . Many insurance companies offer policies , which base the amount of insurance on normal building costs , but automatically increase the limit to whatever you need to rebuild your home should costs change dramatically following your claim . This feature is commonly referred to as Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost , make sure to consider this feature if it is available . Separate additional amounts of insurance will be included for your personal property , other non-business structures on your property and additional living expense . These limits are functions of the amount you carry on your home , normally they are more than adequate but make sure you are comfortable with them as they can be increased if necessary . The other major part of the policy will be your personal liability limit . That limit should be consistent with the liability limits you carry on your auto -LRB- s -RRB- and not less than $ 300,000 . If your net worth exceeds $ 300,000 , you may wish to consider Personal Umbrella coverage . Personal umbrellas are considered a less expensive way to purchase high liability limits . In addition , they usually provide broader coverage and do not have as many exclusions or limitations as basic liability policies .
Let 's be realistic , your home is where you are at and a reasonably understanding of liability means you can be held responsible for the injuries a guest suffers while in your home . Your responsibility in any event is n't likely to absolve the property management company -LRB- or the property owner -RRB- of liability -LRB- or at least a duty to defend themselves -RRB- because no self-respecting plaintiff 's attorney would let a potential pocket full of money get by him or her in the process of assigning liability . The good news is that if you have home insurance you have some amount of liability insurance to protect for the injuries that someone may suffer as a consequence of your negligence anywhere you are at . That includes the time share you have bought and including the property you have traded for in your time-share relationship . Now , none of the latter should be construed to make you liable for any event , only to clarify that you are indeed responsible for your actions and that includes the space you may be occupying as a temporary residence , whether a time share or a hotel room . How much liability you have depends on plenty of things we could speculate on but the answer above stands for itself . Even if you are found to be free of liability , the cost of defense and getting to that point in time after an event is still costly and your liability coverage includes the benefit of defense against these allegations . Liability is expensive to defend and costly to pay for in the absence of insurance so a basic understanding of the tort of negligence and your duties is all I intend to imply in the latter answer .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
I suggest you start by listing all the insurance you are now buying ; auto , tenants or home insurance , health , disability , life , etc. . The list should include a basic outline of the coverage , the insurer or agent and the annual premium . The information on this list may point you in the right direction . I would first consider insurers/agents you are currently doing business with if you are at all satisfied with them.If not , maybe you should be looking for more than just home insurance . Request limits , coverage and deductibles consistent with what you currently purchase.If you have all-risk coverage on your car -LRB- comprehensive and collision -RRB- , I would suggest considering all-risk coverage on your home and other personal property you own . If you have $ 300,000 liability limits on your car , you may want to consider similar limits on your home . Deductibles should be consistent whether they are car , home or medical and represent the amount of risk you are willing and can afford to assume . Features I like to see in home policies include : All-risk * coverage on the home AND personal property , GUARANTEED Replacement cost of your home , consistent liability limits and deductibles . In some locals , you have to be concerned with the perils of Flood , earthquake , sinkhole damage and wind as standard policies limit coverage in these areas . It 's common to look for the least expensive policy but it 's also important to have the RIGHT policy . An insurance policy is just a very expensive piece of paper until you happen to need it .
The six categories are shown on a typical homeowners policy as coverage limits A-F . Coverages A-D are related to property insurance and Coverages E-F are related to liability insurance . Coverage A -LRB- Dwelling -RRB- applies to the coverage for the home , including any attached structures -LRB- e.g. , a garage -RRB- and permanently installed property -LRB- e.g. , hardwood flooring -RRB- . Coverage B -LRB- Other structures -RRB- applies to any detached structures on your property , such as a utility shed or detached garage . This limit is typically 10 % of the Coverage A limit with most carriers , but can be increased if needed . Coverage C -LRB- Personal Property -RRB- applies to coverage for your personal belongings that are other than the property described in Coverages A and B above . This limit is typically set at 60-75 % of the Coverage A limit depending on the carrier , but can be increased if needed . Coverage D -LRB- Loss of Use -RRB- applies if your home ever becomes uninhabitable due to a covered loss -LRB- e.g. , a fire loss -RRB- . It is there to provide for the living expenses associated with having to find temporary housing -LRB- apartment , hotel , etc. -RRB- . This limit is typically set at 20 % of the Coverage A limit with most carriers . Coverage E -LRB- Personal Liability -RRB- provides liability coverage for all of the people permanently residing in the home . Liability insurance provides coverage if you are legally responsible for an act that injures someone or someone else 's property . Coverage F -LRB- Medical Payments -RRB- provides coverage for medical expenses that result from injuries to others that occur on your premises .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Travelers Insurance Company has an excellent renters insurance policy . The Form HO-4 covers Personal Property and Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant -LRB- insured -RRB- . Renters Insurance is a very valuable coverage because it no only offers protection against damage to your personal property but also protection against negligence and personal liability cases that may be brought against you . One valuable example is if there is fire , smoke or water damage to the rented home or apartment unit , the property owner 's insurance company will most likely attempt to collect damages from the tenant if they can prove negligence . In this case , Renters Insurance will provide the legal representation to handle the situation although the policy limit will apply . If you are not sure and do n't really want to commit to purchase renters insurance but may or may not be required to according to your lease agreement , the best way to generate the lowest annual premium is to select the minimum personal property coverage available , the lowest limit of personal liability and the highest available deductible for the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Pay For IV Antibiotics At Home ?
No unfortunately Medicare does not pay for IV Antibiotics or almost any infusion therapy done in one 's home . The only exception is IVIG -LRB- Intravenous Immune Globulin -RRB- for people with a diagnosis of primary immune deficiency disease , although then it only covers the globulin itself .
Medicare will pay for IV antibiotics that are administered in a physician 's office , in a hospital , or at a skilled nursing facility . Medicare will not pay for IV antibiotics that are administered in ones home . This applies to all infusion therapies , not just those that are used for antibiotics .
Medicare Part B does not pay for IV antibiotics used at home but Medicare Part D might pay for the drug itself . In order to have the costs and supplies associated with administering the IV drug covered , it must be done as an inpatient under Part A or in a doctor 's office under Part B.
No unfortunately Medicare does not pay for IV Antibiotics or almost any infusion therapy done in one 's home . The only exception is IVIG -LRB- Intravenous Immune Globulin -RRB- for people with a diagnosis of primary immune deficiency disease , although then it only covers the globulin itself .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for home IV therapy . When infusions are done in the hospital or in a skilled nursing facility , Medicare picks up the payment for infusion therapy . However , it is has not extended that benefit to home IV therapy , even though the costs are much less than what is entailed when receiving IV therapy in a hospital or nursing home .
You would need Long Term Care Insurance if you were no longer able to care for yourself and wanted to receive your care in your home or other location besides a nursing home . Medicare will pay for home health care or nursing home care if there is a need for skilled nursing services . If you need assistance with dressing and showering but do n't need IV 's , physical therapy , speech therapy , or other skilled nursing care , Medicare will not pay for in home services , adult day care , assisted living , or nursing home . Long Term Care insurance will pay for all those options if you are unable to perform 2 or 3 activities of daily living .
Yes , Medicare will cover a sleep study if it is deemed medically necessary due to the Medicare patient showing evidence of obstructive sleep apnea . Medicare Part B covers testing for Type 1 , II , III and IV . Medicare Part A only covers sleep study testing when an overnight stay is involved .
Under most situations , drugs administered via IV are covered by Medicare Part A -LRB- if you are an inpatient in a hospital -RRB- or Part B -LRB- if administered in an outpatient clinic or in a doctors office -RRB- . If the drug is self administered in your home the cost of the drug might be covered under your Part D .
A J code in Medicare is a code used to identify injectable drugs for purposes of billing . The type of injections for which these drugs can be used are intramuscular , subcutaneous , or IV . J codes are also used to designate the generic name and dosage of oral immunosuppressive drugs for billing purposes .
For life insurance that is underwritten , it depends on the kind of skin cancer and how long it is has been since all treatment has ended . Acticinic keratosis , basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma , if detected early , are easily cured and are the most likely types which can result in life insurance being issued , even at standard rates . Malignant melanoma , the rarest and most virulent form of skin cancer , is responsible for 75 % of all deaths from skin cancer . This is the type where , depending on the staging and treatment , are likely to be either rated or declined . Stage IV and recurrent cases are likely to be totally uninsurable . Meet with a life insurance professional that has experience working with underwriters on cases like this for the best possible outcome .
When asking what college major to study in order to be an insurance agent ? The simple answer is none , dont get me wrong Im not against going to college but the reality is successful insurance agents come from all walks of life . When I ask agent that have gone to college and are now insurance agents what they would have done differently , they all say the same thing , I wish I would have skipped college and just got into the business . That being said if youre thinking about being an insurance agent find a good mentor that is willing to teach you how to become successful . Ive ran into too many individuals who have gotten out of insurance as fast as they have gotten in because they didnt take the time to find the right person or agency that would teach them the math behind the machine that make you successful . If you have any other or specific questions feel free to contact me at myfieldtrainer.com
Yes , some do . Back in the olden days they were term policies in which dividends were paid . They date back almost to the days of the covered wagon and are probably just as rare :-RRB- Today we have term products with a return of premium feature . The idea is that if you outlive the term guarantee , you get all your premium back . Of course , you have to pay a lot more premium for this added benefit . Is it worth it ? It all depends on your ability to save on the side and reimburse yourself from your own fund . But it also depends on your philosophy regarding life insurance . Ive always maintained that cash value is secondary in life insurance . The primary value of this product is the survivor benefit . The exact amount of money your heirs need is provided exactly when they need it . And every dollar of that benefit costs pennies in premium . It is quite a deal . If on top of that , do you want to grow some cash on a tax-favored basis , go for it . But just make sure that the survivor benefit remains intact .
I actually have a sad story to relate on this topic from my client files . Ive had longtime friends as clients . He is an avid hunter . Of course , he keeps all his weapons under strict lock and key . Only his wife had access , besides himself . Unfortunately , she reached a time in life where many things got to her . She suffered in many ways . It was like , all of a sudden everything piled onto her . She became very forlorn , and very desperate . She had no hope . I guess she looked at that gun cabinet as the one source of relief . I helped her surviving husband file the claim for the life insurance benefit . He was so shaken , he couldnt even fill out the form . I did it for him . As you can imagine , this was a hugely emotional time . The claim check was received promptly . There had been full disclosure on the application , so there were no questions about hidden risks . Gun use , and hunting in particular , are interesting from a life insurance underwriting plan of you . I am a strong believer in the right of the citizenry to bear arms . They could be used for self-defense , or they could be used for hunting . Either way , they do represent an element of risk to mortality . This could stem from a hunting accident . Or it could stem from suicide . But as long as you go through full disclosure on your application , and you apply with the right company , your beneficiaries should have no problems getting their money .
I can give you some examples from cases I have handled . I think you will be surprised . Many people assume they will not qualify for life insurance , and happily , they are wrong . It takes a lot . One fellow needed to purchase several million dollars of life insurance to cover a bank loan for his business . His business was a bar/restaurant . The night before his insurance exam , a few of his buddies came by to socialize a bit . They did cocaine . Of course , he tested positive . No insurance for him . He probably would have qualified for a guaranteed-issue burial policy . But the $ 25,000 would not have done him any good . He needed that bank loan . And he needed life insurance to get it . And you know what ? He didnt get the life insurance , and he didnt get the bank loan . He would have had to wait a few years before he became eligible again . Five years is the industry standard , but I probably couldve gotten it for him sooner . Another candidate also a business owner went to rehab for both drug and alcohol addiction . Unfortunately , he didnt schedule the necessary follow-ups after his treatment . Carriers were worried that a relapse would be right around the corner without the proper support system in place . He will also have to wait a year or two . Then you have people who have a number of serious illnesses that just arent sufficiently controlled . The combination of obesity , heart condition , diabetes , smoking etc. is wicked . Ive had people come to me with these factors in place , and then some . Has to be some measure of control . Otherwise , you look like a walking timebomb . These cases are extreme . Other cases seem scary but can be quite placeable . Pot smoking ? You can get a policy . Bankruptcy ? You can get a policy . On probation for a felony ? You can get a policy . Suspended drivers license ? You can get a policy . Travel to India , or South America , or rural China ? You can get a policy . Mountain climber ? You can get a policy . Deep water scuba diver ? You can get a policy . Of course , a number of important factors need to be in place , but on the overall , it can be done . Surprise !
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medicare does cover Home Health Care , BUT only if : its ordered by a Medicare approved physician AND the person in incapable of leaving the home AND services are rendered by a Medicare approved provider AND the person requires more than just assistance with activities of daily living -LRB- eating , bathing , dressing , toileting , functional mobility -RRB- . Medicare will not pay for services performed by immediate relatives or members of a patients household . Medicare does not pay for Assisted Living or Adult Day Care . If these conditions are met , Medicare will generally cover medical services in the home as ordered by a Medicare approved physician .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover some part-time home health services such as physical therapy , skilled nursing care , speech-language pathology servcies , etc. . Medicare does not pay for 24 hour home health care however , nor meals delivered to your home , personal care , and homemaker services . Please note , there are a number of conditions that must be met for Medicare to cover your home health care . If you need more than part-time/intermittent home care , Medicare will not cover the expenses . Home health care is very expensive and you can deplete your savings paying for it . For someone wanting 24-hour home health care to be covered by their insurance , they should look into securing a long-term care insurance policy . While long-term care can be an expensive type of insurance to have , you 're paying pennies on the dollar if you needed to make a claim on the coverage . There 's many moving parts to long-term care insurance . If you 're looking to secure this type of coverage , it 's most helpful to consult with an experienced broker to help build a policy that will best serve your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Know If You Smoke ?
When you apply for life insurance , the insurance company will ask about smoking on the application . If you take a No Exam policy , they will ask you about smoking in the phone interview . And if you are applying for a medically underwritten policy , they will test for nicotine in your blood and/or urine . If medical records are ordered and a history of smoking is noted in your medical records , they will take that into consideration , as well .
It depends , who else knows that you smoke ? Does your doctor ? Does your health insurance plan ? Auto Insurance ? If there is a written record of you smoking it more than probable that it will be inside the MIB -LRB- Medical information Bureau -RRB- and it will come up during the underwriting phase . There 's the MIB and your doctor 's chart notes that would be reviewed . Also depending on your state where they do n't apply the contestability rules towards smoking . My state for example waives the two year contestability clause specifically for not declaring if a insured is a smoker or not . What that means is premium paid is returned and no contract was created .
The life insurance company will definitely know if you smoke because that is something you disclose to them . To fail to do so would amount to insurance fraud which is subject to fines and possible imprisonment . When applying for life insurance you want to get the best rate that you actually qualify for . Do not get a policy by withholding or falseifing information . You will not often come out ahead . If you have an agent ever tell you to sign an application that has known wrong information , you should report the agent to your state 's department of insurance . He is putting your financial security at risk by trying to make a quick and easy sale .
If you begin smoking after the policy is issued then the answer is no . Most companies have a question on the application regarding smoking and depending on the policy you are purchasing they may require a blood urine or saliva test and will check for smoking before issuing a policy . If you lie an an application and you die within two years and the company finds out then your policy will not pay the death benefit . This is considered insurance fraud .
Will life insurance know if I smoke ? Well , depending on how much coverage you purchase , if anyone else knows you smoke chances are they will too . First off , most insurance companies ask for an attending physicians statement and chart notes . So if you 've told your doctor , you smoke . Second , many plans require labs so if you smoke it will show up in your labs . And finally , some states have enacted laws that skip the two year contestability clause on life insurance when the applicant lies about smoking . These states view this as no contract was formed and wo n't let the carrier pay a reduced benefit . Just a return of premium .
It is amazing how a life insurance company can find out you smoke . They test urine and blood for cotinine/nicotine , if you take an exam . They usually do a phone interview if you do n't take an exam , so you have to state your smoking status both in writing and verbally . They may order medical records . I once had a client who turned out to be rated a smoker , and when I asked him about it , he said he did n't think there was any way the insurance company would find out because he did n't smoke for a month before the exam and even his doctor did not know he was a smoker . It turned out his wife had told his doctor he smoked ! He may have been able to contest that by taking a new exam , but he , of course , was back to smoking by then . If you smoke , just admit it . If you quit smoking later , you can apply for a rate reduction a year after smoking .
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
It depends , who else knows that you smoke ? Does your doctor ? Does your health insurance plan ? Auto Insurance ? If there is a written record of you smoking it more than probable that it will be inside the MIB -LRB- Medical information Bureau -RRB- and it will come up during the underwriting phase . There 's the MIB and your doctor 's chart notes that would be reviewed . Also depending on your state where they do n't apply the contestability rules towards smoking . My state for example waives the two year contestability clause specifically for not declaring if a insured is a smoker or not . What that means is premium paid is returned and no contract was created .
The term life insurance brokerage market is fiercely competitive and offers a range of guaranteed premium periods like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . The non-rated health classifications are based on two categories : non-smoking and smoking . The non-smoking category is segmented into five sub categories : super preferred , preferred plus , preferred , standard plus and standard . The smoking category is segmented into three sub categories : preferred smoking , smoking and no-cigarette tobacco . Then theres the impaired risk categories classify mortality charges of insureds below the standard ratings , up to 16 tables . Your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition are all mitigating factors in premium pricing term life insurance . A nonsmoking super preferred male or female , age 25 purchasing 10 year guaranteed level term life insurance for $ 100,000 of coverage will pay around $ 80-85 a year .
Does smoking void life insurance ? It can in one way that I know of , if you state that you are a nonsmoker when actually you are a smoker . In my state -LRB- insurance is regulated state by state , your state may be different -RRB- if you misstate your smoking status it `` can '' void the policy , even after two years . The state considers the contract null and void so just a refund of premiums . If you decide to start smoking after you 've purchased life insurance , no penalties apply .
Fully underwritten life insurance policies require you to declare whether or not you use any tobacco products . Although cigars and pipes are smoked , the question seems to suggest cigarettes . Cigarette smoking shortens life expectancy , so smokers pay more for life insurance . If smoking is declared on the application and the life insurance company offers an underwriting decision after the due diligence process , a death claim will be paid . If the insured takes up smoking after the policy has been issued as a nonsmoker , the life insurance company will pay the claim . It is the circumvention of truth that may indeed be classified as fraud that could void the policy in certain states or reduce the death benefit based on smoker rates at the date of issue . Some occasional smokers attempt to beat the urine analysis detection of cotinine , the byproduct of nicotine , by not smoking 8-10 days before the exam banking on their body chemistry to purge the continine from their systems . But you would have to lie on the application . And again , lying on the application could be considered fraud in some states . My advice : There is one life insurance company that offers nonsmoking rates to smokers for three years in an attempt to give the insured time to quit smoking . We can help with that . But bottom line : do n't try to game the system .
Through a urine specimen . They are pretty reliable . Interestingly , I once had a client who admitted to smoking on the application , but tested negative for nicotine on the urine sample . He was approved at non-smoker rates ! People often ask if secondhand smoke shows up . The answer is yes , it can . If you inhabit a very smoky environment day in and day out , and your body has pretty much reached its saturation point for nicotine , it very well could show up on your test . This is important to know . Sometimes people ask , what if I dont admit to smoking on the application , and wait a while after my last cigarette so that I test negative ? Well , if the application asks you if you have smoked in the last 12 months and you say no , that is insurance fraud . If they audit your claim and find out you lied , they can deny the benefit even if you died for a reason unrelated to cigarettes . A word to the wise should be sufficient .
Unfortunately , that is too broad a question to give a specific answer . I can however , point you in the right direction . Smoking status is just one factor in assessing risks and setting rates . Smokers usually will pay more than non-smokers . The reason for the word usually , as opposed to definitely , is that in Canada some companies approach smoking differently . In other words , they charge smokers different rates based on what and how much they smoke . For example , cigar smokers are generally permitted to smoke 1 cigar a month with many companies to still be considered `` non-smokers '' for insurance purposes . I suspect it is for purely competitive reasons for cigar-smoking golfers . However , a more realistic approach is allowing 50 cigars a year which some companies take . I suggest that you look at the online quoting services to get an idea and then work with a local independent agent / broker to get the right policy at the right price . It is very important that you are truthful when declaring your smoking status as the company can deny your claim if you are not . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Health insurance does go up if you smoke . Currently , the increase varies from one carrier to another . The range seems to be between 10 % -35 % . Short-term plans are often an exception since smoking status is sometimes not part of the application . In 2014 , although pre-existing conditions will not impact rates , smoking will be a factor and you will pay a higher rate if you smoke . However , Open Enrollments will take place every year so if you quit -LRB- for a year -RRB- , you may be able to reduce your rates .
In addition to the good information given by the others on this page about smoking AFTER a policy is put into effect , I will address smoking while applying for life insurance . If you put on your application that you do not use tobacco , but then evidence of smoking is found in your labs or medical records , the application will usually not be voided . The insurance company will charge smoker rates , and if you have a health condition that is harmed by smoking , the application could be declined . Also , lying on an application about smoking then makes everything on the application suspect . This can also cause an increase in life insurance rates .
Health insurance absolutely can charge more for smokers . In fact , under Healthcare Reform , the ONLY things for which carriers can charge more are age , location and smoking . Smoking was going to be a 50 % increase . That 's HUGE rate increase , but it ought to give you an idea of the claims that occur as a result of smoking . However , just recently Health & Human services stated they ca n't figure out how to logistically charge more for smoking at this time , so for the 1st year of Healthcare Reform , they are NOT going to charge more for smoking , which could end up raising the rates for everyone else . So again , prior to Healthcare Reform you will pay an increase . But as of 1/1/14 , no rate increase - at least for the 1st year .
Can you hide smoking from life insurance companies ? I have certainly had clients try it . How do I know ? Because they got caught . Once they answered `` no '' to the tobacco question and then evidence of recent smoking was found in their urine or medical records , from then on , all their answers were suspect . Underwriters use some personal judgement in assessing risk , and when a lie is discovered on the application , they are not quick to offer the benefit of the doubt for anything else . Not only that , but you end up paying tobacco rates with a company that may not have the best tobacco rates . When agents know up front what we are dealing with , we are much better able to get you with the lowest priced policy from the start .
Yes , a part of the testing is for nicotine in the system . Some carriers allow for different uses of nicotine products and do not cost as much for coverage as someone who smokes , but still cost more than non smoker rates . This topic is a hotbutton in insurance as the pricing for smoking is significantly greater than nonsmoker rates , the cost differences encourages some people to attempt to deceive on the application . Some states specifically `` waive '' the two year contestability clause in cases where mistatements about smoking are involved . In my state , they do n't even allow the insurance carrier to pay out the benefit at the smoker rate , just return the premiums . One good thing is if you do smoke and want to quit , you can depending on the company , get a nonsmoker rate after anywhere from 1 year to 3 years after quiting . If you decide to quit smoking , inform your doctor so there is a record on file of this decision and good luck .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Do I Need Medicare Part B With Tricare ?
Tricare , formerly known as CHAMPUS , provides civilian benefits for military personnel , and their dependents . Tricare for Life -LRB- TFL -RRB- was designed to offer secondary coverage to Medicare for all who have Medicare Part A and Part B . There are very few ways one can have Tricare without having Part B . Here is a helpful link to explain TFL and Medicare . WEBSITELINK
Tricare , formerly known as CHAMPUS , is a health care program of the U.S. Dept of Defense Military Health System . TFL , Tricare for Life , offers secondary coverage to Medicare for all beneficiaries who have both Medicare Parts A and B . There are very few incidences where one can get this coverage without having Part B , and those incidences are temporary .
When you have original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- and TRICARE , Medicare is the primary insurance . TRICARE pays second -LRB- the idea being to lower your out of pocket expenses -RRB- . Please note , I believe you have to have both Part A & Part B of Medicare to keep TRICARE benefits when you go on Medicare , but you should double-check with the plan to be 100 % sure . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me via my profile page with any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A , you must have both Part A and Part B to continue to receive TRICARE . Once you start receiving Part A and B , you start receiving TRICARE benefits under TRICARE for Life -LRB- TFL -RRB- . There is no advantage for most TRICARE recipients to enroll in Medicare Part D because TFL 's drug benefits are so comprehensive .
Medicare standard is primary to Tricare in all cases . Medicare Part D , if you elect it is also primary to Tricare . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan , let both Tricare and your MA know about the other , and they will organize the coordination of benefits . One important thing to remember is that , if you have Medicare Part A and Tricare , in most cases you will also have to be enrolled in Medicare Part B to keep the Tricare coverage .
Tricare is never primary over Medicare . It will only pay after all other insurances have paid . If you have Tricare and are entitled to Part A , you must have Part B to continue the Tricare pharmacy benefits . However you do not have to enroll in a Part D prescription plan . If you do choose to enroll in a Part D plan , Tricare will be secondary to that plan as well .
Tricare , formerly known as CHAMPUS , provides civilian benefits for military personnel , and their dependents . Tricare for Life -LRB- TFL -RRB- was designed to offer secondary coverage to Medicare for all who have Medicare Part A and Part B . There are very few ways one can have Tricare without having Part B . Here is a helpful link to explain TFL and Medicare . WEBSITELINK
If you are currently on Tricare you will be required to enroll in Medicare parts A & B when you reach age 65 . In most cases this happens automatically . The part B has a charge . When you have a claim the claim is processed first by Medicare . They pay the benefit on their schedule . The balance of the bill is then sent to Tricare . Tricare then pays what they will pay subject to any applicable deductibles and co-payments . The balance is then due and payable by you . In practice most physicians and hospitals get complete information about how the bill will be handled before they treat you . If you are responsible for any part of the bill , they will demand payment , frequently , before treatment starts .
Tricare , formerly known as CHAMPUS , is a health care program of the U.S. Dept of Defense Military Health System . TFL , Tricare for Life , offers secondary coverage to Medicare for all beneficiaries who have both Medicare Parts A and B . There are very few incidences where one can get this coverage without having Part B , and those incidences are temporary .
Active military and National Guard are covered by TRICARE , a health care program for service members and their families around the world . TRICARE is the major part of the Military Health System , a system that utilizes combined resources of military hospitals and clinics with civilian health care networks , as well as a combination of different coverage options depending on where the person is currently stationed . TRICARE coverage does meet the requirements for having minimum essential benefits as called for under the Affordable Care Act .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
For active duty , AGR , and ADOS personnel the answer is yes . Basically whenever you are on orders for more than 30 days . TRICARE is the military provider and very few things are `` out-of-pocket '' as long as you stay within their guidelines . Reserves and National Guard have the option to purchase TRICARE for a specified monthly premium . It changes from year-to-year but it was only a few hundred dollars per month the last time I used it in 2008 . However , compared to most employer plans the premium is relatively low even for a family .
Most branches of the Military on on TriCare and it covers anything medically necessary . Without understanding the specifics being asked here and not having enough room to write everything that 's covered ... this type of group plan will cover any and all medically necessary services that are n't excluded in the policies limitations and exclusions . TriCare is excellent coverage if you have access to it .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Tricare Reserve Select is heath insurance to active military and National Guard , a well as their families . This coverage is not free , so you will pay a monthly insurance premium , though it will typically be less expensive than it would be to purchase coverage through another employer or on the individual health market . It 's hard to say any one health insurance option is `` good '' for all , since everyone 's medical needs vary . I recommend speaking to an agent that can review your personal situation , and make a recommendation based on your needs .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
As a former veteran myself , I remember having some of the best health care around . Military families usually have insurance called Tricare . Its close to free and it works great . The system works for Active Military as well as retirees .
Medicare is primary for most plans , including Tricare for life . This basically means that when you receive services under the plan your bill will be sent first to Medicare , which will pay its portion and then to Tricare which will supplement Medicares benefit if their coverage exceeded Medicare . The process is transparent to the customer unless they read the published report .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Is A Roth Ira A Tax Deferred Retirement Plan ?
Most Roth IRAs are deferred plans . There is a special IRS code for retirement plans that are funded with after-tax dollars . This is the description of a Roth IRA . The money that you put into the account has already been taxed so it is not taxed in the future . The interest on the money is not taxed either . When you withdraw funds from a Roth IRA , those funds will come to you income tax free if you meet certain conditions . It is not a short term plan . It requires patience but it is a well-guarded secret .
A Roth IRA is a tax deferred retirement plan and can generate tax free income . It is not tax deductible , but most middle class Americans are in a low federal and state tax bracket , so Roth IRAs may be a great alternative to tax deductible retirement plans .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
There are ways to save your entire income for retirement if you desire . There are tax qualified plans that defer the taxation on a retirement program and they have annual contribution limits . If you are choosing to save for retirement using 401 -LRB- k -RRB- elective deferral , if you are eligible for a 403 -LRB- b -RRB- or a 457 Deferred Compensation plan , you could reduce your taxable income by up to $ 18,000 in 2015 . If you are over age 50 you can increase those limits by $ 6,000 . You can make contributions to a simple IRA and reduce your taxable income by $ 12,500 and add on an additional $ 6,000 if you are over age 50 . You can establish a defined benefit pension plan and reduce your income by $ 210,000 in 2015 . If you use a defined contribution plan you can reduce your taxable income by up to $ 53,000 . There are a variety of other limits depending upon whether you have highly compensated employees or key employees . The other most important limitation is on the ability of a person to participate in a Roth IRA . The maximum income you can have for a single tax payer is $ 131,000 to participate in a Roth IRA . If you are married the maximum income limit is $ 193,000 . Notice I didnt say anything about reducing taxable income . The Roth IRA is funded with after-tax income ; however , qualified withdrawals can be received income tax free .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement.The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back.If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you.With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay.The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA.Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap .
A Roth IRA is a retirement plan , but is not qualified in the sense that you can not deduct your contributions into the plan . Roth IRAs accumulate tax deferred and distributions are tax free . Roth IRAs may be an option for individuals who are in a low tax bracket and have no employer sponsored retirement plan at work .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
If you have a traditional IRA , anyone can convert to a Roth IRA . He is the rub however , because the traditional IRA is tax-deferred and the ROTH IRA is pre-taxed , you will have to pay taxes on the amount you with to convert to the Roth . There may be strategies available which can help you to pay for that tax , through bonus which may be received on certain Fixed Indexed Annuities . If you are considering Converting a traditional IRA into a Roth , I recommend you call your adviser or reach out to me .
Most Roth IRAs are deferred plans . There is a special IRS code for retirement plans that are funded with after-tax dollars . This is the description of a Roth IRA . The money that you put into the account has already been taxed so it is not taxed in the future . The interest on the money is not taxed either . When you withdraw funds from a Roth IRA , those funds will come to you income tax free if you meet certain conditions . It is not a short term plan . It requires patience but it is a well-guarded secret .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Pay For Lucentis ?
To my knowledge , Lucentis is not yet on the approved list for Medicare prescription drug plans . It was not listed on the Medicare drug formulary finder which is a good indication is not covered . Lucentis is used to treat macular degeneration . In tests it has proven no more effective than Bevacizuman which is about $ 42 per dose vs $ 1600 for Lucentis .
Yes , Medicare does cover Lucentis . While there is debate over which drug is better for treating age related macular degneration , Lucentis or Avastin , Lucentis was approved by the FDA and is the one Medicare reimburses . However , the cost for Avastin is so low compared to Lucentis , that it often costs the patient less to pay for Avastin treatments out of pocket , vs paying the high co-pay for Lucentis injections .
To my knowledge , Lucentis is not yet on the approved list for Medicare prescription drug plans . It was not listed on the Medicare drug formulary finder which is a good indication is not covered . Lucentis is used to treat macular degeneration . In tests it has proven no more effective than Bevacizuman which is about $ 42 per dose vs $ 1600 for Lucentis .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medicare Supplemental Plan F covers 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . Keep in mind , when you have Supplemental -LRB- AKA Medigap -RRB- Plans , Medicare is your primary insurance provider . For medically necessary procedures , Medicare Parts A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- and B -LRB- Doctors -RRB- provides good coverage , but still leaves folks on Medicare with a lot of out of pocket exposure . The Plan F pays for everything that Medicare does n't pay . However , if Medicare determines that the medical procedure you received was n't medically necessary , they wo n't pay anything nor will the Supplement Plan -LRB- regardless of who you get your supplemental plan with -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Long Term Care Insurance A Good Purchase ?
Long Term Care Insurance is a good purchase if there is a risk of needing nursing home , assisted living , or home health care in your future . My father waited too long to get long term care insurance , and no longer qualified for it . It would have been nice to have that extra income to help my mom care for him . There are so many ways that people can be laid up , and hospitals are reluctant to allow people to stay too long . So long term care insurance can be a very good purchase for helping those who need the care , and for those who give it .
The # 1 risk in retirement is human longevity . The longer we live , the odds become higher that we will need assisted or living and/or nursing home confinement . The costs for care are ever increasing , so it 's important to protect your retirement income from the economic eroding affects of long term care costs .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
Long Term Care Insurance is a good purchase if there is a risk of needing nursing home , assisted living , or home health care in your future . My father waited too long to get long term care insurance , and no longer qualified for it . It would have been nice to have that extra income to help my mom care for him . There are so many ways that people can be laid up , and hospitals are reluctant to allow people to stay too long . So long term care insurance can be a very good purchase for helping those who need the care , and for those who give it .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
No , Long Term Care Insurance is not required in Nebraska , or in any other state . Not everyone can afford to pay the premiums for Long Term Care Insurance , and Medicaid exists for those who are unable to afford the expense of living in a skilled nursing facility . However , many people in Nebraska choose to purchase Long Term Care Insurance so that they can protect assets -LRB- protecting the family farm is a big incentive to purchase Long Term Care Insurance in Nebraska -RRB- . They also purchase Long Term Care Insurance so that they have the freedom to spend the benefit at the place of their choice , be that home health , assisted living , nursing home , or other .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is The Cheapest Health Insurance In Georgia ?
The cheapest health insurance in Georgia will vary , depending on which part of the state you live in , and other additional factors . As an experienced broker , we search and find the lowest rates from top-rated companies . Keep in mind that if you qualify for a subsidy , your premium will reduce ... perhaps substantially .
The best way to find the cheapest health insurance in Georgia is to work with an independent agent . That health insurance agent does n't work for just one carrier so they will be able to show you plans from all the major carriers . A lot of agents will also have a website -LRB- like ours -RRB- where you can compare quotes instantly online .
The best way to find the cheapest health insurance in Georgia is to work with an independent agent . That health insurance agent does n't work for just one carrier so they will be able to show you plans from all the major carriers . A lot of agents will also have a website -LRB- like ours -RRB- where you can compare quotes instantly online .
The cheapest health insurance in Georgia will vary , depending on which part of the state you live in , and other additional factors . As an experienced broker , we search and find the lowest rates from top-rated companies . Keep in mind that if you qualify for a subsidy , your premium will reduce ... perhaps substantially .
Health Insurance rates in Georgia are going up . Each family 's cost is going to be different . Your best resource is a local broker that represents multiple companies including major medical companies . The rates in Georgia are different in the Atlanta metro area versus other parts of Georgia . You will need to look at the networks in your area and determine if your doctors are in the network being offered by the insurance company . Health Reform has brought challenges to the price of family coverage . There are new options in the Georgia market to help handle the rising premiums . You might consider clinic programs , tele-medicine , high deductible plans , or many other solutions that lower costs and improve Out of Pocket expenses . The Health Insurance world is changing and you will need help . Do a web search for your area and health insurance and do a review of your current situation to determine if you can do better .
The cheapest car insurance rates in Georgia can be easily found with the help of an experienced broker . That 's what we do best ! -LRB- Along with our top-rated websites -RRB- Among the factors that determine prices are your age , the type of car you own , your coverage and your driving record . Although carriers such as State Farm , Farmers , Liberty Mutual , Esurance , Progesssive and Geico are typically quite competitive , it 's important to shop the right way . Among the cities with the lowest rates , usually , Valdosta , Athens , Brunswick , Cummings and Clayton offer the best pricing . However , specific ages and different types of cars will make a difference in all situations .
Health insurance is regulated by each state . Before you can buy a policy in Georgia -LRB- as an example -RRB- a carrier must file their policy form and rates with the state Dept. of Insurance and wait on approval . This is a long and costly process . About a year ago GA passed a law that allowed carriers to market products from other states in Georgia . So far not a single carrier has filed for approval to sell in Georgia . Despite what some people believe , even if you were able to buy coverage from another state the savings would be nominal , if anything at all .
Some Blue Cross plans will write life insurance , usually through a sister company . In South Carolina life insurance policies are issued through Companion Life Insurance Company . In Georgia , life insurance policies are written by Greater Georgia Life Insurance Company , Some Blue Cross companies are stock carriers , others are mutual , and a few are not-for-profit companies .
If life insurance proceeds in Georgia are left to a person as beneficiary , creditors can not take the money away from the beneficiary to pay the debts of the insured , -LRB- unless the beneficiary was co-signer to that debt -RRB- . If the life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , then creditors in Georgia can access those benefits to pay off the debt owed them by the deceased .
There are many websites that offer you the chance to see free life insurance quotes by inputting your information . That is a good place to find life insurance in Georgia . Be sure that the website uses privacy measures and has good reviews . Getting referrals or looking at blogs is another way to find a good life insurance agency in Georgia , as is reading answers from a website like this one .
Essentially there are two ways to buy a Medigap plan in Georgia . You can buy direct from a carrier or through an agent . When you buy direct from the carrier you get the same plan at the same rate as buying from an agent . Carriers have in house representatives that can only tell you about their plan . They do n't know about competitor plans and are prohibited from discussing a competitor plans . Once you purchase a plan from a carrier any follow up questions are handled by a CSR rep. When you call you can expect to have an automated service answer your call , following the obligatory `` Press 1 for English '' you will be told to `` Please listen carefully as our options have changed '' . From there you will be routed most often to voice mail . Your call will be returned on their schedule , not yours . You will never talk to the same person twice . Or you can buy from an agent that lives in Georgia and is familiar with plans in your area . Some agents will insist on coming to your home , while others will allow you to purchase over the phone using email and your mailbox . Some agents will only represent one carrier . If you go that route you might as well buy direct . Most agents will represent several carriers and help you understand the pro 's and con 's of each carrier . They will be familiar with rate history and can tell you which ones have a better track record of customer service . There are about 15 or so carriers in GA that offer Medigap . Some only sell direct or through their own representatives . Others use independent brokers that represent several carriers . Maybe a third of carriers make their rates available online but most will only disclose rates if you talk to them direct or through an agent . Hint : Some of the most competitive rates are not found online ... Most of the plans use issue age rating but a few , including the top two carriers -LRB- ranked by sales -RRB- use attained age brackets . You need to understand the difference in pricing structure and rate history if you want to avoid sticker shock on renewal . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
The cost of health insurance for a family can vary depending on the plan you choose , the state you live in various other factors such as age and smoking status . The quickest way to find out what health insurance costs for a family would be to go to a website for an independent agent that will let you run a quote or you can call us . Our website allows people to be review plans from all the major carriers in under 60 seconds . Click `` other '' on our website to go the the page to run a quote for a family . You can also give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 . We have helped many clients in Texas , Florida , Georgia , North Carolina , South Carolina , Michigan and Colorado find a great health insurance plan for their family .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
Unlike omst parts of the Affordable Care Act , if you are employed by a business with less than 50 full time employees , your employer has the option of offering coverage , but not is not mandated to do so . The health law does not require businesses with fewer than 50 employees to offer health insurance to their workers . Small Employers wanting to offer coverage to employees may do so using the SHOP exchange , which is meant to help small business owners find affordable coverage . The government offers certainincentives in the form oftax credits and deductions to encourage employers with fewer than 25 employees who set up coverage through SHOP and help pay for it . Currently in Georgia , the only way to sign up for a SHOP plan is to go see an agent , broker or insurance company and fill out the paperwork . Online enrollment is scheduled to be available during next fall 's open enrollment period , starting November 15 , 2014 .
Your best Medigap plan is the one that is affordable and covers what you expect the plan to cover . All Medicare supplement insurance plans with the same letter are identical in every way except the premium . Medigap plan F is the most popular , but It is also the most expensive plan . A couple from south Georgia needed to save money on their Medigap plan . After a few moments on the phone , I showed them how to save over $ 1700 per year by making a simple switch in coverage . #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
As far as I know , any carrier that offers Medicare supplement plans in your state will also include plan F. For a lot of reasons , Medigap plan F is the most popular plan sold -LRB- and purchased -RRB- . Every statistic I have seen shows Medicare supplement plan F participation in excess of 50 % and usually closer to 70 % . In other words , for every 100 Medicare supplement plans bought in a state , 50 - 70 are plan F . While F is the most popular plan , it does not mean it has the best value . Most of my Georgia Medicare supplement clients purchase plan G and enjoy saving $ 300 or more each year vs. what they were paying for plan F with another carrier .
Hi , We have a couple companies that add this on , in the states we write homeowners in : AZ , CA , TX , GA and MO. . The coverage you ask about is probably most competitively priced by Safeco in our areas of operation . This is priced at $ 2 per month in Georgia . We as agents find this a nice add on feature on homeowner policies . It is nice in a couple ways : Safeco does not consider the claims as homeowner claims -LRB- such that they are not in Clue reports -RRB- also there is a deductible of $ 500 despite a higher deductible that will likely exist for the policy over all . What can I say , we like doing business with Safeco anyway , but this feature seems to always get the attention of consumers who have nothing like that now .
Medigap Plans will vary in cost depending on your age , smoking status and the state that you live in . It will also depend on which Plan you go with . Some plans can range between $ 100 - $ 200 per month in states like South Carolina , North Carolina , Colorado , Texas , Michigan and Georgia . However , premiums in Southern Florida are generally higher than in other areas of Florida . The amount of co-insurance , deductibles and co-pays you can save by having a Medigap Plan makes it a very easy decision to make . You can get more information on our website about what the different Medigap Plans would cost . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Where Can I Find Cheap Renters Insurance ?
Shop your coverage with local agents in your area . Renters insurance is normally inexpensive . If you are looking to cut the cost some consider having your auto and renters coverage with the same carrier this will typically get you a discount on both policies . Find yourself an agent that you are comfortable working with as they will be the person that will assist you when you have a question or concern about coverage or a claim .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Where we may find it difficult to define ` Best ' Renters Insurance ; we believe the best renters insurance would be the most comprehensive coverage for a competitive premium rate . We believe in most States , this coverage lies in the hands of Renters Insurance Online available through Stillwater Insurance Group . We have an Online Link for consumers to obtain a quote , choose options and purchase the insurance policy online . If the definition of ` Best ' is ` Cheapest ' ; the easiest method to generate a Cheap Renters Insurance quote is to select a low amount of coverage with a high deductible . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States at : WEBSITELINK
Well sometimes there can be certain people that will need a term policy because of where they have focused their budget in the past , over all it does n't fit every persons goals but will be cheaper . I will use my story to answer the question when I purchased my policy I realized that it would take some focus on my part even working with a very knowledgeable agent I already knew just like most families we wait until about 45 -55 years of age to purchase what we should have purchased in our 20 's in the first place and then we start shopping to find out wow this is not cheap but it is now or never . So $ 300 a month was not cheap for me but I knew it 's now or never so I made a commitment to my family it 's now I want leave them with this burden it 's just a decision just like the one that caused you to make the decision to wait . now where did that come from procrastination and that can be inherited by your children so I would say change your focus change your life .
Cheap car insurance for young drivers is available ... If you know where to look ! Many reputable insurers offer low down-payments and cheap rates . Shopping for these best offers is best handled by an experienced auto insurance broker with preferably 20 years -LRB- or more -RRB- experience . Not only do we help our clients find the best deals , but our websites offer free information and advice that can often help reduce premiums . There are no fees or charges and taking care of clients is the top priority . Brokers do n't charge fees and we do the shopping so our customers save . That 's not a bad deal ! Try us and let us find cheap auto insurance prices for teenagers !
By cheap I assume that you are referring to the premium . The cheap I like to think of is the cost when you have the claim and your company stands behind you and pays everything that you expected . Regardless of the premium , you will then know what cheap really means . A major property loss could take 100 years of premiums to pay for . Having correct coverage is the way to have the truly cheap homeowners policy , find an agent , one you can trust .
Regardless of whether or not a life insurance agency advertises cheap life insurance , the reality is that all life insurance companies must charge you the same price , no matter where you purchased the policy from . However , there are some factors that enter into whether you will find a cheaper policy at one agency over another . Some of these agencies ' methods are positive , and some are negative . Here are some examples of both . Positive 1 -RRB- The insurance agency takes all your health details and shops among multiple carriers to find the one that will issue your policy at the cheapest price . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency will sell you a policy that suits your need , not pressuring you to buy a more expensive policy just because it makes them more money . 3 -RRB- The insurance agent will go to bat for you if you are rated unfairly , and strive to help you resolve that , or find you another policy , if possible . Negative 1 -RRB- The insurance agency offers you a short term policy , or accidental death policy , just to make the sale . They do this whether or not that type of policy best suits your need . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency neglects to ask pertinent health details and then offers you a cheap policy . Or else they ask health details but still claim to be able to get you impossibly low rates , often out of ignorance . Ironically , to get the cheapest life insurance , you need a life insurance agent who is `` valuable '' . Go to someone you trust to listen to you , who will shop your case among multiple carriers to find your best price , and who will not sell you something worthless just to save off a few dollars and make the sale . That way you will have a policy of value at the most affordable price .
Cheap car insurance can be as little as $ 20 or $ 30 per month , depending on where you live , the type of car you drive , your age , and of course , the liability limits you have . Some carriers offer discounts that can total as much as 50 % . It is , however , important to understand that state minimum liability limits may leave you underinsured . Although low liability limits result in very cheap pricing , it 's important that we , as experienced unbiased brokers , advise you which coverages may be the most appropriate . To find the lowest rates , always utilize an experienced broker . Not only do we offer unbiased advice and top-notch websites , but you can also save time and money by quickly finding the best prices . The quoting process typically takes only a few minutes and you 'll be able to view the best options in your area .
There are many carriers out there all can be quite `` Cheap '' But be careful when shopping for rates cheap does n't always mean you have the proper coverage . Also depends on what type of coverage you are looking for . When shopping online there are times that the rate is fantastic then you find out that they are not even allowed to sell insurance in your state . you also have to think about in the event of a claim can they be reached and you talk to someone local ? Buyer beware make you are covered properly like the old saying goes if it is to good to be true then most likely that is the case . However I do have some carries that I have a client in that has full coverage on a car and only $ 143 for 6 months of coverage with low deductible now that is cheap but her coverage is not . So the key is making sure you know what you are purchasing before you put the money out . A Local agent or the States insurance commissioners office can assist you in finding what you are looking for
In order to buy Cheap Renters Insurance , it is helpful to understand your needs , desires and the rating structure of the Renters Insurance Policy . The lowest annual premium will be generated for the minimum Contents Coverage -LRB- Personal Property -RRB- available , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage -LRB- Usually $ 100,000 -RRB- and the maximum available Policy Deductible -LRB- varies from State to State -RRB- . If all 3 of the above items are met , you will generate the lowest premium quote possible . If the Renters Policy is required by a Landlord and you are not purchasing it on your own accord , it may be helpful to find out if the Landlord is requiring to be added to the policy as an ` Additional Insured ' and if so , it would be prudent to find out exactly how they would like their Name & Address to read on the policy endorsement . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If unclear about coverage , it is prudent to contact a licensed professional to answer your questions and assist you in purchasing the coverage you need .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
You need renters insurance when you have something to loose . That something could be more than your stuff . It could be the reasonable rent you have . If there were a fire , and you had to leave for another apartment , you might have to pay more rent . LOSS OF USE is a coverage built in to the policy . If you have to leave your 2 bedroom , second floor apartment where you pay $ 500 a month because of a fire , you can move into a similar apartment and if that similar apartment cost more , LOSS OF USE will pay for the extra -LRB- above $ 500 -RRB- rent . It will not pay for you to move into a four bedroom penthouse apartment . That 's not similar . If a friend or someone else visits , goes to the bathroom and slips on the floor they could get injured ... badly . A renters policy includes two important coverages : MEDICAL PAYMENTS and BODILY INJURY LIABILITY . MEDICAL PAYMENTS would pay hospital or doctor expenses necessary to treat your friend . The limit is usually $ 1,000 but you can buy more and it 's cheap . If your friend gets a lawyer and sues you , BODILY INJURY LIABILIYT will pay for an attorney to defend you AND pay the damages if you lose . The limits generally start at $ 100,000 , but check the price for higher limits as it also is cheap . Finally , there is your stuff . Maybe it 's used and worn and you do n't think it 's worth a lot . But if you had to go out and buy EVERYTHING all over again , it would be expensive . You can buy insurance that will replace your old stuff with new stuff . You just have to make sure you have REPLACEMENT COST COVERAGE . REMEMBER : Insurance does not cover everything for every imaginable kind of claim . There are limits and exclusions . They are generally the same from company to company . Find an agent you can talk to and ask questions . Good Luck Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers 877-414-2031 WEBSITELINK
Have you seen that esurance TV commercial -LRB- WEBSITELINK -RRB- ? Everybody wants CHEAP insurance and almost any insurance can give you CHEAP insurance ... . But the reality is that you get what you pay for . Renters insurance is probably the most affordable coverage that you can find and will probably cost you $ 15 / month for great coverage . Make sure your policy has replacement cost on contents and includes additional living expenses . Saving $ 5 / month could wind up costing you thousands of dollars if you have the wrong policy . Check with an independent insurance agent who can look at multiple carriers and see what policy is right for you .
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
Cheap Renters Insurance is available online ! In order to obtain the cheapest renters insurance , you would need to select the lowest available personal property coverage , the lowest available personal liability limit and the highest available deductible . For those mandated by contract to carry renters insurance and are not interested in purchasing renters insurance , this would be the cheapest way to go ! There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by customers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
That 's a great question ! I 'd like to give you a bit of advice - some things are good to buy `` cheap , '' other things in the long run are better to spend a little more money on . Cheap shoes will hurt your feet , and wear out quickly . Buying a very cheap car often means spending a lot on constant repairs . Insurance is one of those things , especially for a young driver , that it is better to not go `` cheap '' on . You want better coverage , as you are much more likely to have an accident than an experienced driver would be . You will want a lower deductible , as you will inevitably end up needing repairs at some point . Please look for a local agent who can help you , or feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to give you some pointers . Thanks for asking !
Remember cheap does n't mean better . What you want to find is a reputable company AND cheap rates . Compare your coverages as well as the rates - this is what I tell my clients . Another thing to look at is who is selling you the cheap rates - do you have a 1-800 telemarketer to talk to or a Licensed Agent who knows exactly what 's covered in your state ?
Good question but think about it we need to ask ourselves a few questions before we go cheap sometimes cheap is good we all need to be good stewards of our money so the questions we should ask if answered honestly will be an indicator . Do I eat good healthy food ? Do I drink alcohol ? Do I work out at least 20 minutes 2 times a week ? How is my spiritual life ? Then we can decide which policy fits my need it can be fairly cheap but you must answer the questions and have a good consultant that cares about you not the money the money will come when we serve the people .
There are many cheap auto insurance companies throughout the US . -LRB- That is ... carriers that charge low rates -RRB- How cheap will your rate be ? It depends where you live and other underwriting factors that could impact the price . For example , while Progressive , Esurance , Geico and Erie may offer low rates in Ohio , in Pennsylvania or New Jersey , a completely different set of companies may be the best option . As experienced brokers , along with our top-rated websites , we search , find and compare the absolute lowest car insurance rates in all ares . That 's our job and a big reason why customers prefer to work with brokers .
Life insurance is priced the same for everyone . You can not get a discount on life insurance , and the discount store mentality does not work well with life insurance . You need to work with a knowledgeable agent to get your cheapest price . Getting a low quote from someone who knows little about life insurance does not mean you will get that price . I feel that the best way to buy cheap life insurance is to use an agency who can take your health information and match you up with the company that has your best rates . Some , like mine , can be found online . But wherever you go , the place to buy cheap life insurance is where the agent is valuable .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Can Homeowners Insurance Deny My Claim ?
If your claim does not fall under the perils of your policy coverage 's then yes your homeowners insurance carrier can deny the claim . Many denied claims fall in the realm of wear and tear or in other words something that has been occurring over a long period of time . This would not fall under sudden and accidental .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Usually , upon presentation of proof of death and a claim form , the claim is paid . However , a claim could be denied , depending on circumstances . In Canada , a claim within the first 2 years could be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . This essentially means you did not tell or disclose the truth on something that would have changed an underwriting decision . After 2 years you would have to have committed fraud which is much more difficult to prove . A life insurance contract should be approached as a contract of utmost good faith where all parties give full disclosure . In other words , be sure and tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth . Suicide within the first 2 years or last reinstatement would also cause a claim to be denied . If there was an accidental death rider , then that portion of the claim would not be paid unless the death is deemed accidental . . Laws are similar , but vary by jurisdiction . You should check the wording in your policy , your local insurance act and , if necessary , a lawyer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
A life insurance policy must be in force to pay benefits to the beneficiary . Life insurance companies have denied claims for several reasons . There is an exclusion for suicide within the first two years of most policies . Claims have been denied for failure to report important medical conditions . Sometimes the company will deny a claim when the death occurs under unusual circumstances . When a claim is denied the premiums are generally returned .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
When the insurance company denies a homeowners policy claim you can pursue the claim further . The policy itself might state that you must submit to arbitration , however , competent legal counsel can best direct your activity . A scan of the newspaper will show that courts get involved with denied claims and have made some startling judgments . One was in our paper yesterday .
If your claim does not fall under the perils of your policy coverage 's then yes your homeowners insurance carrier can deny the claim . Many denied claims fall in the realm of wear and tear or in other words something that has been occurring over a long period of time . This would not fall under sudden and accidental .
To be honest , I am not sure if you are asking about being denied a policy , or having a claim denied . If you are denied a policy by one company , just have your Insurance Professional find another company whose underwriting standards would enable them to offer coverage . If you are denied coverage on a claim , again , check with your Insurance Professional about that company 's coverage terms and conditions and what their appeal process might be . If still unsatisfied , you could always send a letter to your state 's InsuranceDepartment and ask them to inquire .
We will begin to answer this question with the following caution : when one asks about a policy being ` cheaper ' than another -LRB- especially when it is the first question asked -RRB- , the immediate concern arises regarding the lack of importance of the coverage which is the primary reason for purchasing the insurance . To answer the question correctly , Homeowners Insuranceand Landlords Insuranceare not related in any way other than to provide property coverage on a similar dwelling . TheHomeowners Insurance policy is defined and writtenfor the Owner Occupied home of the titled owner of the property ; the Landlords Insurance policy is defined and written for the Tenant Occupedhome of the titled owner of the property . Each policy contract contains an Occupancy Clause stating the occupancy of thedwelling insured . We have witnessed large losses which have been denied by carriers due to the occupancy not matching the policy purpose . Therefore , if you have a tenant occupied home , you will need to purchase a Landlords Policy and if you are seeking to insure your primary home , you should purchase a Homeowners Policy . The LandlordsPolicy statistically poses a greater risk factor to the insurance company ; however generally , the LandlordsPolicy does not provide coverage for personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- and provides a more limited form of Liability Coverage listed as Premises OnlyLiability . Now , regarding cost , the premium is specific to the carrier 's experience with each type of policy.There are insurance carriers that have a much worse historic experience on tenant occupied properties ; thus , the Landlords Policy would be rated as a higher risk than the Homeowners Policy . However , in most cases , for the same Dwelling Coverage amount , we find that the Landlords Policy Premium islower than the Homeowners Policy . Awise word to the public would be to purchase the correct coverage for the application since if a futureclaim is denied based on the incorrect policy form being purchased , the whole purpose of the insurance is void and unnecessary . For more information regaring Homeowners Insurance , please click the following link : WEBSITELINK
-- > Normal 0 I suggest a different approach to addressing this situation . The only way you could obtain homeowners coverage on a house you do n't live in is to be less than candid on the application . If a problem occurred , you may find yourself and your parents without any coverage . To be eligible for most homeowners policies , a dwelling must be owner - occupied . The policy only covers the dwelling on the residence premises . If the named insured -LRB- you -RRB- dont reside there , the insurance company could deny your claim . Some insurers however will issue homeowners coverage to an insured -LRB- s -RRB- who has a life estate in a property . You could own the property ; grant a life estate to your parents . They could obtain homeowners policy naming them as insured -LRB- s -RRB- and you ; the owner of the property could be included as an additional named insured for your interest in the dwelling and the personal liability insurance . There is a standard endorsement available for that specific purpose . Your parents would be covered for their personal property , additional living expense and personal liability . You would be covered for damage to the dwelling and liability for injury or damage to others arising out of your ownership of the property . In my opinion , this would be the most practical , effective and economical way to address this kind of a situation . It is probably more common than you think .
Life insurance policies are rarely voided . There is a specified period , normally two years , during which the company can deny a death claim if it is determined that the applicant made false representations on the application . I chose the word representation deliberately . An applicant is only bound by their personal knowledge and is therefore not responsible for any diagnosis made after the application is taken . The answers to questions are based upon the knowledge of the applicant not the actual state of affairs . One of the symptoms of alcoholism is denial and if the applicant does not believe themselves to be an alcoholic and no medical professional has diagnosed them as being an alcoholic , the insurance company would be hard pressed to ever deny a claim in the first two years . After the first two years pass the company can not deny a claim .
Life insurance claims can be denied but it is very rare for a life insurance company to not pay the death benefit proceeds if the life insured has died and proof of death has been submitted . If death was by suicide or a material misrepresentation in the first two policy years of the policy , the claim will be investigated . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in very limited circumstances of fraud .
Your auto insurance company can deny your claim , although most claims tend to be approved . For example , if you fraudulently filed a claim , or attempted to recover damages on a vehicle that you did not drive or own , surely , the claim would be denied . If you pet was attempting to drive your vehicle and hit a stop sign , then do n't expect a check from your insurer . When in doubt , an experienced broker can explain the entire claims process , how long it takes and what the likely outcome is going to be .
Homeowners Insurance will not pay for dead tree removal . A tree is a plant and it is the homeowners obligation to show pride of ownership and to take care of his or her yard . Big plant or small it 's the homeowners responsibility to maintain . Also a dead tree just sitting there and has not caused any damage to the dwelling , therefore there is no claim . I know what your thinking . The tree is a potential hazard and could fall on the house and cause damage or hurt someone . If this were to happen and you were unaware of any potential hazard there would be coverage should the tree fall on your house . However , if you are aware the tree is a hazard and fail to mitigate the hazard you are negligent and are not living up to your obligation as a homeowners and risk having the claim denied .
Life insurance companies issue contracts . There are requirements for the company and there are requirements for the customer . If the customer commits suicide in the first couple of years most companies can , by contract , deny the death benefit . If there has been an attempt to defraud the company the claim can be denied . Very few claims are denied . Law suits often accompany a denial .
Life insurance claims are usually not denied , especially if the policy has been in force for over 2 years . If a policy has not been inforce for two years , a claim may be denied for a material misrepresentation of fact . Which means you did not disclose fully something that could have affected the underwriting of the policy . Not declaring you were a smoker for example . Or if death is by suicide the claim will be denied if within 2 years -LRB- In Canada -RRB- If the policy is over 2 years old the insurance company has to prove fraud which is difficult to prove . If the policy contains exclusion such as death while skydiving , no coverage for that event . If you have any further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Long Can You Stay On Health Insurance Of Parents ?
You can stay on your parents health insurance until age 26 at which point you would be kicked off the plan and have to secure your own coverage . You have the option to get your own coverage prior to age 26 if you prefer . Consult with an experienced broker to discuss your options and see what the best course of action is for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! One of the nice things the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- did was extend the amount of time that children could remain covered by their parents ' insurance to the age of 26 . It was designed to help college and recent graduate aged kids get coverage when they otherwise may not have been able to afford it . Thanks for asking !
You can stay on your parent 's health insurance website until you are 26 ... subject to some conditions . As an experienced health insurance broker with more than 33 years of experience , this question is asked almost daily ! Of course , a child can apply for their own policy at any time or get coverage under a University or group plan also . As a broker , our job is to closely compare each option and determine the best policy for cost , benefits and network coverage .
Because of recent law changes by President Obama , children may stay on their parent 's health insurance policy up to age 26 . This is true throughout all 50 states . Children dependents , up to age 26 , may stay on their parent 's policy even if they are married , attending school , not financially dependent upon their parents , not living with their parents or even if they are offered their own insurance through employment . Special needs children can be covered under their parent 's plan past age 26 .
That is a great question !! I 'm really pleased to see you looking already at your future , that 's a great thing ! My advice : Health insurance , stay on your parents ' until you 're 26 , then go to the www.healthcare.gov site and get a policy for yourself , as you most likely will qualify for a subsidy to help pay for it . Life insurance , find a whole life policy that will allow you to buy a minimum amount , but will allow you the option to increase your coverage as you become more solid financially . I have several companies that I work with that will allow you to do that , and since you are young , and in good health , the premiums are pretty reasonable to start out with . If the parents have you on their auto insurance , beg them to let you stay there . If the parents or someone co-signed loans for you , you may want to consider covering that debt with a term life policy , just in case , either in addition to , or in place of -LRB- in addition to is preferable -RRB- your whole life policy.Live at home , and save on renter 's insurance . In all seriousness , take the advice about the health and life insurances . Congratulations on your accomplishment , graduating college is something that you should be very proud of doing ! Thanks for asking !
If you were to hire workers to provide all the services that a stay at home mom performs each day , the cost would be staggering . So it is important not to underestimate how much life insurance to purchase on a stay at home mother or father . However , with most life insurance companies , the stay at home parent will only be able to purchase the amount of coverage that is on their `` working outside the home '' partner . Therefore , when you look at how much insurance to purchase for your family , you will need to look at the whole picture . Most people buy enough life insurance to replace at least 5-10 years of income , or financial value , as in the case of a stay at home mom or dad .
In most cases , as long as the cars are in your parents name and your parents want to continue to assume liability for your actions you can stay on your parents policy . Some carriers will start to question why a child is still on a policy if the child become older , say in their 30 's but it is still doable . There comes a time when parents make the call as they feel their child should be responsible enough to be on their own and not continue to place liability on the parents .
Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- dependent children are allowed to stay on their parent 's health insurance coverage until age 26 . This is without regard to the whether the dependent child is or is not a full-time student , is married , or has coverage available through their own employer . So , in the vast majority of situations a dependent child can not be kicked off their parents coverage until they turn 26 . I say the vast majority of cases because in typical fashion there are these odd quirks in the law that no one read before they passed it . One of those odd quirks applies to what are called `` grandfathered '' health plans -LRB- policies that were in effect prior to the March 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act . Buried in the fine print is a provision that became applicable on January 1 , 2014 . Under this provision , if the adult dependent child does have health insurance available to them through their employer then they can be dropped from their parent 's coverage . As such , whether your parent 's individual or group health insurance plan qualifies as a `` grandfathered '' policy can be a crucial factor in determining the adult dependent 's eligibility for continued coverage .
This is a very relevant question because there is not a black-and-white answer to it . Lets suppose you have a family where mom does stay at home with the kids . Tragically , she dies . What is the best possible thing that can happen with these kids ? Really , its for dad to stay home with them . Theyve already lost mom . They are going to need their dad more than they ever have . He is THE parent . Dad may want to keep working and hire a Mary Poppins-type nanny , but that is the second best solution by far . He really should stay home from work to the greatest extent possible and just connect and bond and nurture and comfort these kids through what may be the most devastating occurrence in their life . Obviously , he will need money to be able to afford to stay home . That is what I think is the number one function of life insurance on a stay-at-home mom . This is a hard sell to insurance companies these days , because they keep thinking in terms of percentage of the wager earners coverage , and on and on . But if I get a couple who really want dad to stay home if the family does lose mom , I fight hard to get them a policy to make that happen .
Under Obamacare adult children can stay on their parents ' health insurance until they are 26 . The law allows you to be on your parents 's plan if you are married . You may have to convince your parents tha , t although you are married , can vote , drive and serve in the military , you still need to be on their health insurance .
Under the Affordable Care Act aka Obamacare a child can stay on a parents plan until they become 26 . They can stay on the plan even if they are offer employer sponsored group insurance or are marrierd . The only issue is that if they are on their parents plan and they have a child the child can not go on their plan .
That will depend upon what type of health insurance you have and what your coverage status is . I will presume that you are a young person who has taken advantage of the changing age definition for dependent coverage under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- that allows dependent children to stay on their parent 's health insurance until they turn 26 . In that case , once you turn 26 you are no longer eligible to be covered as a dependent under your parent 's policy . This means you will have to take out health insurance coverage if it is available through your place of employment , purchase your own individual health insurance policy , or enroll in a government based health plan such as Medicaid if you meet the low income requirements for such a program . If you are already enrolled in your employer 's group health insurance plan or have already obtained individual health insurance then the fact that you are turning 26 will have no impact on your eligibility for health insurance coverage under that policy .
Children can stay on their parent 's auto policy , for the most part so long as they continue to reside with them in their parent 's home and are driving one of their cars on a regular basis . If the child decides to purchase and register a car of their own , then they will need to have their own policy , at which point they would be removed from their parent 's .
Under the Affordable Care Act children may stay on their parents ' health insurance plan until they reach the age of 26 . At 26 they have a number of choices and options . When they reach 26 they can take COBRA if their parents plan was a group health insurance plan or they can buy individual health insurance since they have a qualifying event .
the good news : Ohio is the cheapest state in the country for auto insurance . the bad news : auto insurance for teenagers is very still expensive no matter which state you 're in . but here are a couple tips for getting lower rates : - stay on your parents ' policy . unless there are special circumstances , it almost always comes out cheaper to stay on your parents ' policy than having your own policy . - shop around . companies have different appetites . the more companies that you get quotes from , the better your chances at finding lower rates .
If you are on your parents ' health insurance plan you can stay on that plan until you turn 26 under the Affordable Care Act . Prior to turning 26 you will receive notification from your health plan that you will be terminated when you turn 26 . When you turn 26 you will have three options : If your parent 's plan is an employer sponsored group plan you will be offered COBRA . This would be the same plan you currently have with an administrative fee attached of 2 % if the employer has more than 20 employees and up to 10 % if the employer has under20 employees . If you are on an indivdual/family plan you will be offered a choice of plans from your exisitng health insurance plan . Your third choice is to find your own health insurance plan with the carriers offering individual plans in your state .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
A child can stay on their parent 's auto insurance policy longer than you may realize . Each company is different , but if the car remains titled to the parents , and the child remains in the household -LRB- student status may be required -RRB- , there may be no specified age limit . Certainly , there may be advantages to staying on the policy , including taking advantage of multi-policy and multi-car discounts . Also , if the son or daughter is involved in an at-fault accident or receives a moving violation , the impact of any rate increase will be reduced . As an experienced car insurance broker , we provide information and rates to consumers that save time and money .
Dear Stay @ Home Mom , I agree with David . It depends . It depends on the family situation and financial condition in the event that the Stay at Home Mom would pass away and no longer be able to contribute to the family . Above and beyond the emotional/social value of the parent , there is an economic value that is considered . You may have heard the term `` Human Life Value '' in relation to life insurance . As difficult as it is to do this , it is an attempt to place a monetary value on the contributions of the person who passes away . In the case of a Stay @ Home Mom , the income of the working spouse in addition to the family savings allows the mom to stay home and take care of the children . If she passed away , the surviving spouse would most likely have to pay for day care . So simply projecting out just the additional cost of daycare could be a starting point ... I hope that sheds some light on it , and hopefully that serves as a starting point to talk to a local professional who can help you and your spouse choose the best life insurance coverage for you !
If your parent is age 65 or older , they qualify for Medicare so you can not typically add them onto your healthcare coverage at that point . Depending on the particular health plan you are enrolled in , you may or may not be able to add your parent onto that plan . Check the summary page in your health plan and see what it says or you can check with your health plan administrator to confirm whether they allow parents as dependents on your family plan . If your health plan allows this , here are other qualifications you will have to meet with the IRS . You must already be claiming your parent as a dependent on your federal tax filing . The IRS dependent qualifications include : Your parent is under age 65 , makes under $ 3650 per year gross income , you provide more than half of your parents ' support for the year .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Obamacare Take From Medicare ?
Obamacare decreases funding for Medicare by more than $ 700 billion between now and 2020 . The cuts will be used to fund rebates for those under age 65 who either do not have insurance now or will be purchasing health insurance through the health insurance exchange -LRB- now called the marketplace -RRB- . The subsidies are for low income individuals .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
Let us begin by being clear on what ObamaCare is not . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- a.k.a. - ObamaCare -RRB- does not in itself provide insurance to anyone . ObamaCare is a bureaucratic & administrative structure that imposes requirements on the private health insurance system and , where accepted by state governments , expands the eligibility range for qualifying for Medicaid . It is funded through government appropriations channeled through several departments of the government -LRB- Health & Human Services , IRS , DOL , etc. -RRB- , a wide range of new taxes -LRB- tanning salons , medical devices , taxes on Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans , taxes on health insurance companies , increased Medicare Part A tax on high income wage earners are few examples -RRB- , changes to existing tax breaks -LRB- reducing the FSA deduction from $ 3500/yr to $ 2500/yr and eliminating the eligibility of over the counter drugs from coverage under FSA plans -RRB- , a $ 63 per employee per year fee assessed on group health insurance plans , the eventual employer mandate and individual mandate tax penalties for non-compliance , reductions in the amount of out of pocket medical expenses you can deduct from your personal income taxes -LRB- threshold increased from 7.5 % to 10 % of income to qualify for a deduction -RRB- , fees -LRB- insurance companies have to pay for the privilege of selling their products in the government marketplaces -RRB- , and $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over the next decade was shifted over to help fund Obamacare . This is not a total listing but hits many of the essential high points of where the money is supposed to be coming from .
No , Obamacare does not cover Medigap , or any other Medicare related expenses . In fact , Obamacare actually calls for over $ 700 BILLION in cuts to the Medicare system over its first ten years , a budgetary item that places the benefits available to our country 's senior citizens at tremendous risk . The benefits of Obamacare are only available to those under the age of 65 , which basically equates to this law taking money away from caring for our nation 's seniors to secure coverage for younger individuals , at least those younger Americans that do not make enough income to cover the cost of coverage themselves .
If it has not already , it eventually will unless there are further delays or changes to the Affordable Care Act . Granted , those who have plans that were in place before the passage of the law on March 23 , 2010 can technically keep these policies in effect . That assumes your insurance carrier does n't phase out such policies and that you make essentially no changes to the policy . You may recall there was quite a national uproar over this issue late in 2013 that prompted President Obama to kind of have to live up to his `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' promise so we have seen more renewal offers of existing pre-Obamacare policies since then in the individual and small group marketplaces . And this does kind of trap these policyholders . ObanaCare compliant policies are generally significantly more expensive than their pre-Obamacare counterparts . So , you can experience some pretty significant rate increases on your old policy in some cases and still be marginally better off financially than moving to an ObamaCare compliant policy . I am certainly seeing this scenario play out in some cases . For ObamaCare to have any vague chance of working financially they really need to pull as many people as possible into their pool . Continuing to allow the existence of non-compliant policies denies them this revenue stream and probably a healthier population that chooses to maintain such policies . So , regardless of the promises of politicians , consumers need to be vigilant if they have an old style policy that they want to keep . The pressure will continue to build to save you people who do n't know better from your `` trash '' policies as the administration referred to them and to move you into the glorious world of ObamaCare .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
Asking this question tells me that you need the help of a health insurance broker familiar with your marketplace . Do a Google search , call the Better Business Bureau , look in the Yellow Pages -LRB- if any one does that anymore -RRB- , ask a friend , but get somebody to do the leg work for you . Or , of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov and look up coverage there . When using HealthCare.Gov the consumer should understand that not all health insurance carriers are available through the government marketplaces and that provider networks and approved prescription lists may be different with the same carrier depending upon whether you are dealing with their products outside or inside of the government marketplaces . One good thing about ObamaCare is that the simple answer to your question is just `` apply with an insurance carrier . '' The bad news about ObamaCare is that they now give you a specific time of year -LRB- the open enrollment -RRB- for you to enroll in coverage and after that time only persons experiencing certain change of life status events can enroll for individual coverage outside the open enrollment period each year . You are asking this question nearly 2 months after the close of the first open enrollment period on March 31st , 2014 . If you could have enrolled during that open enrollment period but for some reason did n't and have n't experienced a change of life status event -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , having a baby , losing employer based coverage -RRB- recently then you technically ca n't enroll in major medical insurance again until January 1 , 2015 . Being uninsured will also technically make you subject to the individual mandate tax penalty when you do your individual income taxes next year . Do n't feel all alone , millions of people went through the first ObamaCare enrollment and still managed to stay uninsured . Some by intention other by inattention . If you can pass a few simple medical questions and coverage for pre-existing conditions is n't a must then I would suggest you look into getting a Short Term Medical policy to tide you over for the rest of the year . Be advised that Short Term Medical insurance is not viewedas meeting the requirements under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual mandate penalty . But , many people are finding that the cost of short term medical insurance is low enough against the prices of the new ObamaCare compliant plans that even taking the tax penalty into account they are dollars ahead with the short term policy . For advise please feel free to contact me .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
Obamacare is national mandatory health insurance for all Americans . Presently the health care law does n't address long term care as does Medicaid . Individual long term care insurance is private insurance and at present is not directly effected by Obamacare . It is conceivable that Medicaid could be effected by Obamacare and may have future ramifications for long term care . It 's simply too early to assess the impact .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
Obamacare will impact Medicare by reducing the expected rate in growth on Medicare spending by approximately $ 700 billion over the next 10 years and using those savings to help fund Obamacare . It is important to note that I used the term reduced expected rate in growth as this figure has been characterized or oversimplified by some politicians as a $ 700 billion dollar cut in Medicare . These are not the same thing . With that clarification in terminology stated , with the oldest of theBaby Boomer generation already entering their Medicare years the number of people covered under Medicare will increase substantially in coming years at the same time that spending levels on Medicare are being bent down significantly . An increased number ofenrollees from a population that has grown accustomed to getting whatever healthcare they wanted whenever they wanted it at a time when the funding for this increased demand is being deflected downward from previous levels will be problematic to put it politely . Medicare reimbursement levels to health care providers will be further decreased and reimbursement models and approaches are already being changed . Finding physicians who want to accept new Medicare patients has been a growing issue for several years now and this trend has to be expected to increase . First , we have a shrinking supply of physicians to meet this growing demand and treating the Medicare population , which by virtue of their age are higher consumers of health care services , at reimbursement levels that often do n't cover the costs of services rendered are and will force healthcare providers to make some difficult business decisions . The implications for the quality of care and access to care for senior citizens are very serious and I expect this will be a source of much lively political debate in the coming years .
What does obamacare mean for nurses ? From an health insurance point of view . the same for just about everyone . Note : my opinion here . Professionally , obamacare will mean a much harder job as I think hospitals will cut staff and pay . There will not be a bonanza of new jobs or money with Obamacare as the only way to get it to work is reduce costs and there will be downward pressure .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- a dependent child can be covered on their parent 's health insurance policy until they turn age 26 . After you blow out the candles on your birthday cake when you turn 26 you have 60-days to obtain your own health insurance coverage . If you fail to do so within that 60-day period then you will be unable to enroll in ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance until the next open enrollment period for an effective date of the first of the year . In 2014 the open enrollment period begins on November 15th and the earliest date your coverage could go into effect would be on January 1 , 2015 . If you have missed your 60-day enrollment window then you could possibly take out a Short Term Major Medical policy to cover you until you can enroll in ObamaCare compliant coverage . Please be aware that Short Term Major Medical policies do not cover pre-existing conditions , some can decline you for coverage entirely , and they do not meet the individual mandate requirements of ObamaCare for the purposes of avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty .
The original plans were to cut $ 700,000 from Medicare to help pay for ObamaCare . Now that the ObamaCare Roll Out has been so full of questions about the viability of ObamaCare the cuts to Medicare should be restored as the adjustments are made to the health insurance industry to restore a workable health care system . It has seemed extremely strange to me that `` our government '' would be passing laws that trample the benefits of prior legislation such as social security and medicare and Part D . One would think that if our government can not fund a new program without having to rob Peter to pay Paul that would assist them in stopping the run away spending train
Yes , No and Maybe . Now , are we all clear on that ? The simple version of things is that failure to comply with the individual mandate will trigger a penalty for an adult of $ 95 or 1 % of Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- . And , if the average citizen knows anything at all about ObamaCare then this is probably the piece they know about . As with so many aspects of ObamaCare , when one gets down into the details the picture gets less clear . First , there were certain groups excluded from ObamaCare and the individual mandate from the law 's very beginning -LRB- members of certain faiths such as the Amish , people enrolled in health care sharing ministries and Native Americans are prominent examples -RRB- . You are also exempted from the individual mandate penalty if the lowest cost marketplace option in your area is more than 8 % of your family income or you fall below the tax filing threshold . As the law has continued to `` evolve '' there has been a new class of exemptions granted by the IRS for `` hardship '' exemptions . This IRS form provides 14 different hardship exemptions a taxpayer can claim to avoid paying the individual mandate penalty . Some are rather narrowly constructed and have an obvious logic to them , the exemption for being homeless for example . Others , are worded in ways that can leave a lot of room for creativity . Some of my favorite hardship exemptions are ; 1 -RRB- You received a shut off notice from your utility company . -LRB- So , do n't pay your gas bill for a couple of months , get a shutoff notice then pay your bill , and you qualify for a health penalty waiver - can anybody foresee lots of people having `` cash flow '' problems on their utility bills in the years to come ? -RRB- 2 -RRB- You experienced the death of a close family member . -LRB- Yep , that 's it . Does n't really define the time line , what `` experienced '' truly means , what does `` close '' mean and how far out on the family tree can you go and still say someone was a family member . The potential for creativity in this area is hilarious to anticipate . -RRB- 4 -RRB- Your individual plan is cancelled and you believe other marketplace plans are unaffordable . -LRB- When it comes to belief , do any of us really believe that health insurance is affordable ? What is my belief predicated on ? Will my belief be viewed differently if I am a Tea Party donor or a supporter of the Occupy movement ? -RRB- 5 -RRB- You experienced another hardship in obtaining health insurance . -LRB- I agree that brevity is the soul of wit but this may take things to the extreme . What 's a hardship to one person is an inconvenience to another . Dust off your creative writing skills , I can foresee lots of tales of woe about losing your dog of 15 years -LRB- hey , the dog meant more to me than some close relatives -RRB- , that you only have dial-up internet , why the mind runs wild with the possibilities ! So , will you be penalized on your 2014 taxes in 2015 if you do n't have acceptable health insurance . Technically , yes . In practical terms , many people will be able to claim an exemption and that will significantly dilute the anticipated revenue stream -LRB- and the government has already included individual mandate tax penalties in its cost projections for ObamaCare -RRB- from and the practical effect of the individual mandate on people 's behavior . In many ways you will have to be almost actively seeking out the opportunity to pay the tax penalty or be in that place in life where you are getting by financially without a health insurance payment and not much of anything that could smack of a hardship occurs in your life . For a lot of other people , some life circumstances during many years of their lives will let them take a pass on the penalty . You can bet the tax preparation services are going to be going great guns on this , they 've already started trying to help people enroll . It 's only logical to extend that to making sure every hardship their client is entitled to is reported .
The PPACA or better known as Obamacare is a mandatory federal program where all Americans are to participate or pay a penalty . The program begins in 2014 . All Americans will participate in Obamacare , but not all will pay the full premium or may not pay at all based on means testing . The middle class may receive some credits to offset the premium , but for many low or no income Americans , theyll simply pay nothing . Keep in mind that almost half the country does n't pay federal taxes , so any short fall generated from Obamacare will fall to federal tax payers .
The Affordable Care Act aka Obamacare takes over $ 600 million from Medicare to pay for the new health insurance plans . The funds are being taken from providers , doctors , lab & xray facilities , etc. which means providers will be paid less . Since providers are being paid less for their services there has been a decrease nationally of providers accepting Medicare . Last year there was a 9 % drop in Medicare providers with doctors either dropping out of Medicare or not taking new patients . The Medicare Advantage program is also impacted since the law is attempting do reduce the number of participants and payments to providers . If you have Medicare and currently have a doctor you may not see many changes in the near term .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Certainly President Obama has never publicly made any statement that would indicate a plan to take away Medicare and to do so would be an act of political suicide . Whatever position you may take on our president 's actions , results or intentions , he has demonstrated some pretty keen political survival skills . The more appropriate question would be `` Are the President 's health care policies going to have a negative or positive effect on Medicare ? '' An examination of the Affordable Care Act and its funding mechanisms shed more light on this subject . To help pay for the expansion of health care for those under age 65 and to provide the premium subsidies for persons earning less than 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level you will find that approximately $ 700 billion dollars in what would have been increased spending on Medicare are being diverted to ObamaCare over the next decade . We will still be spending more on Medicare 10 years from now than today but at reduced levels and at precisely the time when more Americans than ever will be moving into Medicare as the Baby Boom generation fully enters its Medicare years . The net consequence of this would seem to be negative to the Medicare population . Projected reimbursement levels to health care providers for serving Medicare patients -LRB- already thought to be below or at the cost of providing these services by many health care providers -RRB- are expected to steadily decline in the coming years and I have seen reports indicating that they will fall below reimbursement levels for Medicaid patients . The number of physicians accepting new Medicare patients is already a national problem and if reimbursement level decline as predicted this will only make the access problem worse for senior citizens . And , yes , a national review board is supposed to provide `` guidance '' on appropriate treatments for seniors though the composition of this body and any recommendations they will be making are unclear at this time . This is the so called `` Death Panel '' some have referred to . This term may be overstated but as described in the health care reform law it will have great latitude in its decision making and little outside oversight . So , I will conclude by saying that the reasonably expected impact of the health care reform law on the Medicare population does not bode well and will make it even harder for the program to live up to the expectations of the persons who will be covered by it . Remember , while campaigning , then Senator Obama , when asked by a person if his program would pay for a pacemaker to be implanted in her 100 + year old mother who was still active , had a will to live and wanted to enjoy a good quality of life , said in response that `` will to live '' was a subjective measure that would be impossible to administer and that perhaps the best response would be for her mother to just take a pain pill . Though to be fair , he did n't say whether she should just take a pain pill as needed or to take a handful and wash them down with some Jack Daniels .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Part B Medicare Cover Prescriptions ?
Some Chemotherapy and injectable drugs are covered under Part B but most drugs are not . That is why you need Medicare Part D which is your Prescription Drug Plan . Part D is administered by private insurance companies under the supervision and guidance of the Center for Medicare Services . You must select a Prescription drug plan or face penalties by Medicare .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Medicare is a federal government-run health insurance program for individuals age 65 and older -LRB- and those on disability or have end-stage renal disease who are under age 65 -RRB- . It 's made up of 4 parts : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A - this is your hospital insurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B - this is your physician insurance 3 -RRB- Medicare Part C - also known as Medicare Advantage . This coverage is sold by private insurance companies and provides benefits equal to or greater than those provided by Medicare Part A and Part B . Some carriers offer prescription drug coverage with a Medicare Advantage plan 4 -RRB- Medicare Part D - this is your stand-alone prescription drug plan . This is also sold by private insurance companies and can be used with Medicare Parts A & B . Many individuals add a Medicare supplement plan to their Part A & B coverage to cover expenses Medicare does n't cover .
Medicare Part B does not cover prescriptions . Medicare Part A & B only covers about up to 80 % of the total costs of healthcare related charges . You can get a Medicare Supplement Plan to cover the co-insurance , deductibles and other expenses that Part A & B does not cover . In addition , you can get a Part D prescription drug plan to cover your prescriptions .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
In short , Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- pay for approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses - Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . The deductible for Part A in 2014 is $ 1,216 - $ 147 deductible for Part B . You are responsible for the other 20 % of your health care expenses . You can cover all or some of these expenses by securing a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- or a Medicare advantage plan . You MUST keep paying your premiums for your Original Medicare coverage under either scenario . Please note , Original Medicare does not cover prescription drugs . If you want to add prescription drug coverage , you 'll need to secure either a Medicare Advantage plan that includes drug coverage -LRB- MAPD plan -RRB- or a separate stand-alone part D prescription plan .
Azilect is a medication that is covered under Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . You have to be enrolled in Original Medicare to get a Part D plan . You can also enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- like an HMO or PPO -RRB- that includes Part D prescription drug coverage . Any drugs that are covered under Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- are ones that get administered in a doctor 's office -LRB- injections -RRB- , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , drugs used with some types of durable medical equipment -LRB- nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- . Sometimes drugs are covered under very limited circumstances -LRB- certain drugs in a hospital outpatient setting -RRB- . Since it falls under Part B , you pay the 20 % of Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . If you feel like you need help paying for your Medicare prescription drug costs , you can contact Social Security -LRB- 1-800-772-1213 -RRB- to apply for Extra Help . According to CMS , Extra Help is a `` Medicare program to help people with limited income and resources pay medicare prescription drug plan costs , like premiums , deductibles , and coinsurance . ''
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . An exception to this to have insulin covered under Part B is when insulin is administered via a medically necessary insulin pump - under this scenario , an external insulin pump and the insulin may be covered as durable medical equipment . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . If you 're looking for a Medigap plan or are interested in seeing if a lower rate is available compared to your existing plan -LRB- Medigap plans are standardized -RRB- , please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To confirm whether Part B will cover Prolia and what conditions must be met to have it covered , you will need to contact Medicare directly . I believe Prolia has been covered under Medicare Part B for a number of years up to one injection every 6 months - typically required to be recommended by your physician . It can often be listed under Part D plans ' formularies as well , but as it is often administered by a doctor , it would typically be cited under Part B. Please note , Part D plans can change their coverage year to year - they are not guaranteed renewable and every plan is different . The drugs that a plan covers can change , the premiums , deductibles , copays , coinsurance , and other factors of a plan can change each year . Plans can even be terminated or replaced and therefore automatically disenroll the consumer , forcing them to select another plan . For the insured person , it 's vital they review their prescription drug coverage each year to determine what plan will best serve their needs for the coming year . When Prolia is covered under Part B , a Medicare Supplement plan might cover the other 20 % of the cost after Medicare pays it 's 80 % share . Whether the Medigap insurer will cover the other 20 % would need to be confirmed with a carrier - when it comes to drugs covered by Part B , there 's usually a couple extra conditions that have to be met for it to be covered as most drugs are covered by Part D. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with Medicare Supplement help . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part D is your prescription drug plan . It is a good idea to have a Part D plan in addition to a Medicare Supplement Plan . When someone turns 65 they go on Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B . They get Part D to cover prescriptions and a Medicare Supplement Plan to cover what Part A & B does not .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
`` Original '' Medicare will cover SOME medications under Part B . As a general rule , infusion therapy , immunizations administered in your doctor 's office and most diabetic supplies -LRB- including insulin -RRB- may be covered under Part B. Most prescriptions filled on an outpatient basis by mail order or at a retail pharmacy are covered under Medicare Part D. Your Part D prescription drug plan is a separate benefit offered by private insurance carriers . The premium you pay will vary by zip code and the covered medications . Many Part D plans have an annual deductible that must be satisfied before brand name prescriptions are included with copay 's . Be sure to verify that the medications you take are included in your Part D drug formulary You can compare drug formulary 's at Medicare.gov by using the drug formulary prescription plan finder .
The Federal program known as Medicare does not have comprehensive prescription coverage . Medicare Part A covers hospitalization and Medicare Part B covers doctors visits . Medicare Part D is the prescription drug coverage and Medicare Part C is a plan that combines Parts A & B -LRB- and often D -RRB- into one plan . Both Parts C & D are run by private insurance companies which contract with the Federal government to offer these plans .
No , Medicare Part A does not cover prescription drugs unless they are part of inpatient treatment in a hospital or skilled nursing care facility . A limited number of outpatient prescription drugs are covered by Medicare Part B , and most prescribed drugs are covered by Medicare Part D . A Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- also includes prescription drug coverage .
Medicare covers the same basic health care in Massachusetts as in the rest of the country . Part A covers hospitalization , home health , hospice , and some nursing home care . Part B covers outpatient care , medical equipment , some therapy , some prescription drugs , and misc other services and items . Medicare Part D covers prescription drugs . Medicare supplement plans cover some of what Medicare Part A and B does not .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . Consult with an experienced Medigap broker to see which plan would be most suitable for your specific needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Transfer My Car Insurance To Another Vehicle ?
If you sell a vehicle and obtain a new vehicle you can keep the same policy . However the rates will adjust according to the new vehicle . When replacing a vehicle you will need to call your agent so the agent can update your existing policy and make sure the coverage 's are adequate .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
Assuming that you mean due to the replacement of your existing car with another , then yes , coverage would be handled as a transfer replacement on your policy . Otherwise , you would have to buy a new policy every time you bought another vehicle or swapped one for another . It is best to talk with your Insurance Professional about the transaction in order to make sure the transfer of coverage from one car to the other is handled properly and without any un necessary delay . If you are replacing an older car that may not have Collision coverage to a newer car where it is either advisable or required -LRB- by the terms of your loan or lease agreement -RRB- then be sure to talk to your advisor about making sure your revised policy will include all of the required coverage . That is also a great time to talk about any and all available discounts .
Great question ! There are several reasons why you might want the ownership transferred . As those fine folks mentioned , tax considerations are a good reason ; The inability to manage the affairs due to declining mental health or the death of the owner is another . Another very common reason is the transferring of ownership from the parent , to the insured child once they are in a position to assume that ownership . In my case , I purchased policies for my kids when they were little -LRB- if you have kids , do it as soon as possible also , and save yourself and them a ton of money over their life -RRB- and will transfer the ownership to them when they are capable of assuming the payments . If you have further questions , I 'm happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Talk to your Insurance Professional when you are in the process of shopping for a new car . They will be able to give you an idea as to the difference in premium for the new vehicle so you are not surprised . When you have made your decision , provide them with the Year , Make Model and Vehicle Identification number for the new car along with any lien or lease information . They will be able to process the transfer of coverage from your old car to the new one and provide your dealership with all the necessary documentation to enable them to finish your deal and transfer the registration as well to the new car .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
If you purchased another car just call your agent and have the insurance transferred to the new car . Otherwise if you sold your car and are not planning on driving , then cancel the insurance . The insurance company will return any unused premium . Obviously you can not insure a car that you no longer have . If you are planning on driving you need to talk to your agent about getting liability coverage or in many states you will lose your license for driving without insurance , even though you do not own a car . Liability protects you from law suit in the event of an accident and has very little to do with vehicle ownership .
Yes , you can transfer ownership of life insurance policies . There are , however , some things of which you should be aware . If the policy is currently assigned for collateral , or there is an irrevocable beneficiary , their consent would be required before a transfer . In Canada , with one exception , transfers of ownership are considered a deemed disposition . In other words , it is the same as if you cashed the policy in and it may trigger a taxable event . The one exception is a transfer to your child when the child is the only life insured under the policy . This creates an opportunity for an intergenerational wealth transfer . -LRB- If interested ask me for details -RRB- . Child includes any natural or adopted child , grandchild , stepchild , son or daughter - in-law . Check to be sure of the consequences , before you make a transfer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
If by transfer , you mean the changing of ownership , be advised of the potential taxable event if there is gain the policy . Order an in force ledger and have it reviewed intandemwith the original policy and the last annual policy statement . Having an insurance and tax professional review these documents can assist you in determining the economicviabilityof the transfer . If by transfer you mean , exchanging the present policy under the 1035 rules for a new policy without changing ownership or the insured , you can do that.Whetheryou should that or not is another question . Seek out an insurance and tax professional before moving forward with a transfer or exchange . We can help with that .
Renters Insurance can not be transferred from one tenant to another tenant ; the named insured can not transfer the insurance to another person . However , if the named insured moves to a new rental location , the location can be changed by request to the Carrier 's Customer Service department in writing or online -LRB- if available -RRB- . If the named insured is moving to another State , the policy will need to be rewritten as policy forms are approved separately by each independent State thus requiring a rewrite to the new State . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States should you be unable to make a change to your current renters insurance policy based on your current situation . An exemplary online solution for all ! WEBSITELINK Should you need additional assistance , please contact a licensed professional to answer your specific questions !
Yes . You can transfer the ownership of your life insurance policy to someone else . One reason that people change ownership though is to try to keep it from counting as an asset when qualifying for Medicaid . In those cases , it only works if you transfer it 5-years or more before applying for Medicaid . You can transfer the ownership to a funeral home for a 1st day exemption from Medicaid but you do n't want to do that with a large policy because Medicaid will get any money that is not used for the funeral . You can also transfer the beneficiary from one person to another .
Auto insurance is a unique product to the vehicle -LRB- s -RRB- and person -LRB- s -RRB- it is covering . So transferring insurance coverage from one vehicle to another is not possible . What happens is the coverage for the current vehicle is cancelled and the coverage for the new vehicle is added . Contact your local agent to discuss coverage availability and pricing for your location .
Yes , the policy owner has the right to transfer the policy to another owner . Care would have to be taken to ensure it is done without adverse tax consequences . We have often seen policy owners simply make the change directly with the insurance company only to find out later that the result was taxable . Depending on the facts and circumstances , the transfer itself can be taxable to the extend of gain and in many cases , a transfer might result in the death benefit being taxable when received . There are several ways that a transfer might be arranged such as by gift or sale . There are IRS regulations which set the value of the policy for tax purposes . Life insurance , tax and legal professionals can help you assess your situation to avoid traps so plan ahead before making changes .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
On if the Annuity is already in a Qualified Retirement Account . An IRA is a type of Qualified Retirement Account . That basically means the money in the account was contributed on a pre-taax basis . Qualified Retirement Accounts usually can be transferred from one account to another as a general rule . -LRB- there are a few exceptions to this -RRB- But if the Annuity is a non-qualified Annuity then you are not able to transfer it -LRB- it is technically a transfer not a rollover -RRB- to an IRA . And there is no need to do so . An IRA has a less favorable tax status than a non-qualified annuity . It would not be a benefit to transfer it to an IRA .
As with any asset , ownership of a life insurance policy can be transferred to a new owner either by gift or by sale -LRB- or , in rare cases where the parties are less than careful , a transaction that is deemed part gift & part sale . -RRB- However , there are potential tax consequences which are important to keep in mind . Probably the most important tax trap is making a `` Transfer for Value '' of a life insurance policy . If a policy is sold , either for cash or in exchange for some other valuable consideration , the policy death benefit will fully taxable to the beneficiary unless the transfer qualifies for certain exceptions . The financial cost of having what was intended to be a tax-free death benefit become fully taxable is so high , it is imperative to check with a qualified professional before executing a policy transfer . Other tax implications include potential gift tax on the fair market value of the policy if the transfer is by gift , potential income tax on deferred gains in the policy if the transfer is by sale , and potential income tax on the fair market value of the policy if the transfer is from an employer to an employee .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Who Has The Cheapest Renters Insurance ?
The cheapest renters -LRB- tenants -RRB- insurance is the one that pays the full amount needed when a claim is filed . Anything less is a poor policy . The cheapest policy is the one that comes from an agent that you can trust . With that agents advice you can craft a policy that will provide adequate protection for you .
Cheap Renters Insurance is available online ! In order to obtain the cheapest renters insurance , you would need to select the lowest available personal property coverage , the lowest available personal liability limit and the highest available deductible . For those mandated by contract to carry renters insurance and are not interested in purchasing renters insurance , this would be the cheapest way to go ! There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by customers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The cheapest renters policy is not the one with the lowest premium . The cheapest renters policy is the one that pays the most when you have a claim . The place to purchase the cheapest renters policy is from a trusted insurance agent . The agents advice and help in setting appropriate limits could save you thousands of dollars .
The Cheapest Stand Alone Renters Insurance is available through Stillwater Insurance Group . In order to obtain the lowest quote for renters insurance , you must select the minimum property coverage required , the minimum liability coverage needed and the maximum available deductible ; this would provide the cheapest quote for Renters Insurance . There is a link available in multiple States in order to obtain a quick quote and purchase your renters insurance online . WEBSITELINK If the insurance has been required by a Landlord , it may be a good idea to find out if the Landlord needs to be listed as an Additional Insured on the policy ; in which case , the Landlord must provide the name , address and applicable account number -LRB- if any -RRB- to be listed by the insurance carrier on the policy .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
The most expensive renters policy is the one that was never purchased . The cheapest renters policy is one that covers your entire claim . Whether it is liability or loss of property , inadequate or non-existing renters coverage is the most expensive . Consult with a knowledgeable agent and carefully weigh the risks . Regardless of what you pay in premiums , a well-designed plan will be the cheapest in the long run , particularly if there is a large claim .
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
The cheapest renter 's policy is the one that pays the full amount of a claim and leaves you paying nothing more than the deductible . Everything else costs too much ! You probably wanted to know what company or type of company is cheapest but that is not really a bargain . Having enough coverage with a company that will pay the claim is the cheapest way you can go .
Where we may find it difficult to define ` Best ' Renters Insurance ; we believe the best renters insurance would be the most comprehensive coverage for a competitive premium rate . We believe in most States , this coverage lies in the hands of Renters Insurance Online available through Stillwater Insurance Group . We have an Online Link for consumers to obtain a quote , choose options and purchase the insurance policy online . If the definition of ` Best ' is ` Cheapest ' ; the easiest method to generate a Cheap Renters Insurance quote is to select a low amount of coverage with a high deductible . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States at : WEBSITELINK
Obtaining Renters Insurance is simple and quick ! There are n't too many questions to answer and there are just a few points to look out for ! If you are renting an apartment , a house or a townhouse/condo , you would qualify to purchase a renters insurance policy . If the landlord has required you to purchase the insurance , it is important to find out whether the landlord wishes to be listed as an ` Additional Insured ' on the policy ; if so , you would need to ask how the Additional Insured clause would read -LRB- i.e. Name , Address , Account # etc. . . -RRB- If you are simply looking for the Cheapest Renters Insurance , you would request the minimum available Personal Property Coverage , the minimum available Personal Liability Coverage , and the maximum Deductible available . This would generate the lowest premium . On the other hand , if it is your desire to assure that all your belongings including artwork , jewelry , furs and additional high value possessions are sufficiently covered , you would need to speak with a licensed representative to assess whether the policy has available options to extend coverage to provide what you would need ; or if perhaps , an additional Personal Article Floater may need to be purchased . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
The cheapest renters policy is the one that gives you enough money to pay your legal costs and restore everything that was damaged -LRB- minus the deductible . -RRB- The most expensive renters policy is no-policy because at the time of loss , the entire burden is born by you . May I suggest that you meet with a professional insurance agent and secure a quote ? Setting appropriate limits is the way to make sure that you have the cheapest coverage .
Renters Insurance can be purchased Online ! Renters Insurance is designed to protect tenants from financial loss due to damage or theft of Personal Property and protection from cases of Personal Liability . In order to obtain a quick and free quote for renters insurance , you will need to state the amount of personal property coverage you desire , the personal liability limit and the deductible for the policy . If shopping for the cheapest possible premium , you should request the minimum amount of personal contents coverage that is acceptable to you , the lowest limit of personal liability -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- and the highest available deductible . Once you have the rate quote , you can proceed with the purchase of your renters insurance policy . The link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States may be used directly by Consumers . WEBSITELINK
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The cheapest renters -LRB- tenants -RRB- insurance is the one that pays the full amount needed when a claim is filed . Anything less is a poor policy . The cheapest policy is the one that comes from an agent that you can trust . With that agents advice you can craft a policy that will provide adequate protection for you .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Tax Will I Pay On Life Insurance ?
Life insurance is usually left to a beneficiary income tax free . There will be income tax charged on the interest paid if the death benefit is taken in installments . Estate taxes can apply if the amount of coverage pushes the estate above the exempted amount . This year the amount exempted from federal estate tax is $ 5,250,000 .
How much tax you pay on life insurance will vary from none to some depending on how you use it and what it does . Usually there is no income tax due on death proceeds . ON rare occasions , the benefit could be taxible , but in the vast majority of situations the death benefit will not be taxable . As far as cash values go there are both taxable and non taxable ways to set up your cash values . You should talk these aspects over with the agent you are doing business with .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy . The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is alegal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trustsreceive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy.The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
At first I understood the question as Peggy did , then I saw Bob 's answer ... So I 'll address both concepts . Life insurance FOR children is a great idea and a great GIFT ! That is WHole Life - not Term . You can start a policy on a baby for $ 50,000 very inexpensively and by the time they are adult , the policy could well have doubled in face value and grown several thousands of dollars in cash value . That cash could be used for college , to buy a car , etc. . Then the policy could be turned over to the now adult child to continue as protection for their future family , etc. . The amount of Life insurance needed for yourself when you have children has many variables to consider when determining how much is enough . I always recommend to buy as much as you can afford . Again , Whole Life . There are tax advantages , cash value and other benefits that only come with Whole Life . If you also have a spouse in addition to the children you 'll want to consider how much it would take to replace your income . Is there a mortgage ? Do you want to pay for college for your kids ? These things and more should be considered when determining how much is needed . You 're best bet is to consult with an experienced Insurance Adviser to figure out what your needs are , and then to help you find the best company and policy to meet those needs .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
When Should Long Term Care Insurance Be Purchased ?
A good time to purchase Long Term Care Insurance is before age 60 , simply because rates are lower the younger you are . Also , the chances of having a health condition are lower the younger you are , which in turn affects rates or even your ability to get Long Term Care insurance at all .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Actually , long term disability insurance and long term care insurance are not the same type of policy nor do they cover the same things . Disability insurance is to replace a percentage of your income when you have an illness or injury so severe you can no longer work . Long term care insurance is primarily for your aging years to cover home health , assisted living and nursing homes when you are no longer able to take care of yourself . Long term disability insurance should be purchased at a young age as soon as you go to work earning a wage . Long term care insurance should be purchased between your late 50s or early 60s .
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance to their clients around age 50 . But the purchasing trend of long term care appears to be around age 60 . However , if youre family has a predisposition to disease , chronic hospitalization or nursing home confinement when theyre old , you may want to consider long term care insurance when youre young and healthy . You should purchase long term care for your retirement years . The statistics are significant that youll experience a need for assisted living or perhaps nursing home confinement . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 on medical and extended care during their retirement years . Securing long term care is important , especially when youre healthy and heading into your late fifties , early sixties .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
Long term care insurance and long term disability insurance are separate and different products to solve two different types of problems . Long term disability insurance should be purchased when starting your career . These policies protect your income by paying you the policyholder up to 70 % of your monthly income if you are ever injured or ill to a point where you are no longer able to work at your current occupation which you have been educated and trained to do . Long term care insurance should be purchased later in life usually 50s or 60s . These policies are designed to pay for help in your golden years . They usually start when a person can no longer take care of themselves at home . These policies progress with the patient from home care to assisted living to finally a nursing home . This allows a person to be cared for without liquidating their entire estate and be able to leave their estate to their loved ones .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
People who have very few assets and/or income should probably not get long term care insurance . If there are immediate needs that will go unmet because you are concerned about a possible long term care stay in the future , then the cost of long term care insurance may not be worth it . Also , if you may perhaps go on Medicaid in the future , even without needing long term care services , you should not purchase long term care insurance , in most situations .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
No these are two totally separate types of insurance plans used to cover totally different needs . Disability insurance can be either long term or short term . Long term disability is used to replace your income for the rest of your working life . It usually has a bit longer elimination period 90-180-360 days before benefits begin to pay . The benefits can pay as long as age 67 when social security benefits start . A short term disability insurance plan pays benefits sooner within days , but only lasts a few months or up to a couple of years . Both disability insurance plans are insuring most peoples most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . Disability insurance should be purchased when a person starts working for a living . Long term care insurance is meant to cover a person that can no longer care for themselves . The person needs home health care , assisted living or a nursing home . Usually the time to purchase a long term care policy is when a person gets older , typically in their 50s or 60s , but some wait until their 70s . It really depends more upon their health and lifestyle . Just do n't wait until you have been diagnosed with an affliction , then is too late .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Is Life Insurance Not Necessary ?
Some people -LRB- my husband included -RRB- feel that life insurance is not necessary if they have saved up or invested enough money to cover any needs that might arise . I disagree in the respect that savings and investments can be depleted on medical bills , long term care costs , or other large expenses . Whereas life insurance pays out at death , so it is protected from being exhausted prior to death , and can pay off even bills or final expenses after savings run out .
If you do not own anything and have no family then life insurance may not be necessary but keep in mind someone will have to pay the cost of disposing of your body , either by creation or burial in potters field . My opinion is that everyone should at least have enough insurance or money set aside to pay for the cost of cremation .
Why is health insurance necessary ? Actually it 's not necessary , at least for another year . In 2014 changes will be coming . But as of today , health insurance is not necessary to have . You can self insure . The thing is if you self insure and have claims , you 're expected to pay them . So you would have to surrender assests to pay that bill . Insurance of ANY KIND is simply a form of liquid money to pay for things so that your other invested wealth can `` stay '' invested . So no insurance is never necessary , it just is a smart solution for some issues .
Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met ; days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 152 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Qualifications to receive the Medicare SNF benefit : 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Although a Medicare plan may cover SNF copayments , given the qualification restrictions for the Medicare SNF benefit , Medicare beneficiaries should consider separate Short Term Care nursing facility coverage to manage the financial risk of an uncovered SNF stay .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
To be specific about what health insurance does not cover , you would have to check your plan 's policy 's exclusions & limitations . However , if you 're asking a general question , I think the key term here is `` medically necessary '' . If your provider bills a service as medically necessary , then it would generally be covered . From a common sense standpoint , why would an insurance company cover something that 's not medically necessary . A good example of something that 's not medically necessary is cosmetic surgery .
Life insurance is only necessary if you have a set outcome that you want to achieve , and you can not reach that goal without it . E.g. Maybe your goal is that your children can go to college , even if you are not around to finance their education . Do you have enough invested or saved up now to attain that goal ? If not , life insurance would be necessary if you died in a short time , because no other vehicle could provide a large infusion of cash into your assets shortly after you took it out . No one can look into the heart of someone else to determine that something is necessary for them . But you can tell that by looking at your own goals , determining if you have the funds to meet those , and then judging whether life insurance is something that could help you attain those outcomes , either in life or in death .
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
Breast augmentation is generally considered a cosmetic procdure and not a medically necessary procedure , therefore , it is usually not covered . Breast reduction can be considered medically necessary and covered by health insurance if the breasts are causing back and neck issues . If it is considered medically necessary the surgery is covered once a woman is 18 years old and an adult .
Most health insurance will only pay for breast reductions if it is medically necessary . Medically necessary is a subjective term . For example if you want breast reduction surgery for cosmetic reasons it would not be covered . If on the other hand if you were 5 ' 2 '' and needed reduction surgery to ease back issues posture and pain it may be medically necessary . You should check with you doctor , read your Evidence of Coverage and check with the insurance company .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Life insurance is not essential in terms of being mandated . E.g. Auto insurance is legally required in order to drive a car . Life insurance is not legally required in order to live . Life insurance is essential to most people , however , in terms of being necessary . The people who it is necessary to are not the person being insured . They are those who are left behind .
Medicare does not pay for private duty nurses , or a private room when not medically necessary . You are really describing Long Term Care which is also not included in Medicare . There is a difference in skilled care , respite care and personal care . If you qualify for medically necessary skilled care , Medicare will cover that , but as you asked the question , my response would be no it does not .
The amount of coverage on a homeowners policy is prescribed by the lender in the majority of cases . As long as the market conditions are lower than the cost of rebuilding that works well . However , when housing prices rise , lenders often want more coverage than necessary to replace the house . In California the lenders are not allowed to demand more than the amount necessary to reconstruct the home . Your agent can provide all the information that you require .
Insurance is what many would call a `` necessary evil '' . We pay for it to ensure that there will be some help in the event we face a loss . The absence of insurance can wipe out a family or business financially . When in place Insurance can cover medical expenses , automobile accidents , dental services , real estate , valuables and a persons life . It is definitely necessary to help cover potential losses that could happen to any of us . I know sometimes it hurts but we really need to look into having it .
Medicare Supplemental Plan F covers 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . Keep in mind , when you have Supplemental -LRB- AKA Medigap -RRB- Plans , Medicare is your primary insurance provider . For medically necessary procedures , Medicare Parts A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- and B -LRB- Doctors -RRB- provides good coverage , but still leaves folks on Medicare with a lot of out of pocket exposure . The Plan F pays for everything that Medicare does n't pay . However , if Medicare determines that the medical procedure you received was n't medically necessary , they wo n't pay anything nor will the Supplement Plan -LRB- regardless of who you get your supplemental plan with -RRB- .
Whole life insurance is financial protection for your life and your income . The purpose of life insurance is to replace income lost when you pass away . Your beneficiary -- the person you chose to receive the replacement money -- will receive a check or a series of checks when you pass . In most cases , a beneficiary is a spouse or a child . A beneficiary should always be someone who depends on your income to survive . Whole life insurance covers you for your entire life . A major difference between whole life and term life is that whole life grows cash value . Cash value is somewhat of a savings account within your insurance policy . In the first few years that you pay into the policy , the insurance company charges higher rates than is necessary to insure your life . The extra amount that you pay goes into the cash value account . Cash value grows over time and can be borrowed against if you need cash .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can Someone On Disability Get Life Insurance ?
Disability insurance is based on morbidity events . If the morbidity event doesnt have inherent mortality debits or negative implications , then life insurance , a mortality product can still secured all other things being equal . That means a disability caused by an injury that has recovery prospects has a better opportunity than a disability caused by a disease that is ongoing as an example .
Yes you can get life insurance , you just will not be able to get the disability waiver of premium rider . The type of policy , premium , and face amount might depend on the reason for your disability . You could get anywhere from Standard or even Preferred Rates to having to go with a higher premium Guaranteed Issue policy
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Anyone that depends solely on their paycheck to get by needs to insure it against a disabling eventthat might require extended rehabilitation . An insurance company will not underwrite someone that has a large amount of passive or unearned income . They will also not insure someone that does not medically qualify . Finally , an insurance will not replace 100 % of one 's lost income because a -RRB- the insured would then have no incentive to return to meaningful employment , and 2 -RRB- the maximum monthly income replacement is around 2/3 of lost income and it is income tax free -LRB- if the insured pays out of pocket -RRB- . Permanent total disabilitycan bea living death . Not having the ability to bring in any income at all is one of the worst things that can happen to a person , especially to us ego-driven males . Total disability was -LRB- prior to 2009 -RRB- the single most likely reason for losing one 's home . In short , the consequences of a disability can be worse than death . There are various statistics that show how often disabling events occurs , but who cares about statistics ? If it happens to you , statistics do n't pay the bills . One should buy DI early in their working life . That 's when it is inexpensive and the premium can be guaranteed not to go up -LRB- unless additional coverage is purchased later -RRB- . Group DI is not portable . Own your own coverage . If you do n't have it yet . get it .
Anyone who has someone relying on them for financial support should have Disability Insurance . Becoming disabled for a period of time is not uncommon , and it can happen at any age . Very few families can get by on one income , and even single persons can lose their life 's savings through an extended disability . Becoming disabled generally does not just take away income for a period of months or years , it comes with medical bills and other extra expenses connected to the cause of disability . That is why anyone who makes and relies on making an income should buy Disability Insurance , in my opinion .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Yes , there are Disability Insurance policies that someone with diabetes can get . For persons with very well controlled diabetes , you will be rated up but may be able to get a 2 to 5 year benefit . If you are unable to get that type of policy , there are graded Disability policies that some people with diabetes can get . These pay a limited benefit during the first couple years . Contact a broker for Disability insurance to make sure you have access to all the choices available to you .
Even if someone has car insurance , if you choose to sue them you have to file in small claims court unless this is a much larger claim . I would reach out to an attorney to get more details . When someone has insurance , usually that company will give you a settlement however sometimes what they offer is not what you can get or should be awarded which you end up in court anyway . There are some great attorneys that specialize in accidents . I do not know what state you are in so I can not make a recommendation but just do some homework . Get someone that is reputable . Good Luck .
You can get Disability Insurance from websites like ours , that shop it for you from several companies . Or you can contact a local life insurance agent . Disability Insurance is carried by companies that usually also carry Life Insurance . But make sure that you are talking with someone who thoroughly understands Disability Insurance so that you will get the features in your policy that accomplish what you desire .
In order to get VA Life insurance , someone must meet one these conditions : 1 -RRB- Have converted their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days after separating from the Service . This can be extended one year with a statement of good health . 2 -RRB- Have been given a VA rating for a new service related disability incurred in the past two years . This qualifies them for S-DVI -LRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Qualified for VMLI -LRB- Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance -RRB- by virtue of being a disabled veteran who was able to get an SAH grant .
People do n't buy Disability Insurance because they feel they ca n't afford it , because they do n't think that they will ever become disabled , because they assume someone will take care of them if they do become disabled , because they are confused on how to go about buying Disability Insurance , or because they just do n't like to think about it . A quick call to a reputable life insurance agent who sells disability coverage can help clarify prices and process and help them get on the road to protecting their families if a disability occurred .
Without knowing more about you , it is impossible to know whether you should get Term Life Insurance . The type of life insurance you should get , or whether you should get life insurance at all , is best determined in a consultation with an experienced agent who can help fit the product to your needs and budget . This can be done in person , over the phone , or even by email . But one size does not necessarily fit all , and talking over your situation with someone who can help you sort through the thousands of products can be extremely helpful . Generally speaking , though , there are two main characteristics of someone who should buy Term Life : they needa lot of coverage for the least possible cost now , and they will not need as much -LRB- or any -RRB- life insurance in the distant future .
A disabled person is eligible for Medicare Part A and Part B after 24 months of being disabled . The disabled person is automatically enrolled in Medicare after getting two years of Social Security Disability benefits . If someone is age 65 and has just recently been disabled , they can still receive Medicare at age 65 .
No , you can not get life insurance on anybody , and not everybody can get life insurance on you . In order to get life insurance on the life of someone else , the owner of the policy must have some financial connection to that person . If it is not a close relative , an eligible person may be someone who owes you a substantial amount of money , for whom your are providing a home , or some other insurable interest . That guideline helps prevent people from taking out policies on others just to make a windfall , or even for criminal intent .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
