start question
life-insurance
What Happens When Term Life Insurance Is Paid Up ?
Actually term life insurance can not be paid up . It just expires or has a steep premium increase many times 1,000 % . The cash value policies such as whole life , universal life , indexed universal life or variable universal life do endow or are `` paid up '' plans in which you are asking . Sorry !
Term life insurance is never paid up . Assuming you make your premium payments , if you are still alive at the end of the term life insurance policy 's stated time period -LRB- e.g. - 10 years -RRB- the policy ends and the life insurance protection ceases . In this case the insurance company has won the bet , you did n't die during the period the policy was taken out for and they get to keep all the premium paid for taking on your risk during that time period . The only exception to this general rule is in the case where a Return of Premium rider was purchased with the term life policy . In this situation if you are still alive when the term life policy reaches the end of its stated period of coverage the policyholder is refunded the premium they have paid to the insurance company over the life of the policy . You do pay additional premium costs for this Return of Premium provision .
Term Life Insurance does not have the option to become paid up , like permanent life insurance does . If you pay your policy each monththrough to the end of the term , the policy simply ends or takes on a higher cost . There is nothing to cash in . Also , you do not have the option to pay term at an increased cost for a shorter time period , like you do with permanent insurance . If you quit paying on it at any time , the policy ends .
That is an excellent question ! One of two things will happen . If the policy was paid up long ago , and has remained in effect , then it acts like any other policy , and when the insured passes , it pays out . Unfortunately , what happens most often is that Parents had a policy on the child , the parent that paid the bills passes , the policy does n't get paid , goes into grace period , and then lapses , and cancels . All those years of payments go up in smoke . Please ensure that your loved ones have a copy , or access to , your finances , sand their payment schedules , so that this does n't happen to you . I have had to have the conversation about unpaid policies far too often , and each time it breaks my heart to see the child realize there is no insurance . Thanks for asking !
A life insurance policy is paid up when all required annual premiums have been paid . If the policy is a `` whole life paid up at age 95 '' contract , the policy is paid up at age 95 . It is important to note that the term `` paid up '' is often misused . In whole life policies that pay policy dividends , the dividend values are frequently used to buy `` paid up additions '' which are paid up , additional amounts of insurance that have cash value and add to the base policy . The cash value of paid up additions may be projected , based on the current dividend scale , to grow to a point in the future where those values may be used to premiums on the base policy . The policy is not paid up when the policy owner pays premiums this way .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
A paid up life insurance policy is one that requires no more premiums for it to remain in effect . In essence , you have paid enough premiums that , left untouched , your policy will stay in effect for the rest of your life . Some people want to quit paying premiums before the policy is paid up , and choose to settle for a `` reduced '' paid up amount of insurance . The same thing happens , the policy will stay in effect with no further premiums paid . But the face amount of the policy will be less than what it was originally .
If a life insurance policy is truly `` paid up '' it simply means no further premiums are due and it is guaranteed to be that way . Some people use the term `` paid up '' incorrectly to describe premium `` offsets '' using dividend values to pay required premiums . Such arrangements are not paid up and not guaranteed . More on this in the last paragraph . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums and are not paid up until age 95 or 100 . A policy can also be `` paid up '' at a lesser value than the death benefit . Whole life policies feature a `` reduced paid up '' non forfeiture provision . In the event the policy owner wishes to stop paying annual required premiums , the policy owner can ask the insurer to reduce the death benefit amount for the policy so that no further premiums would need to be paid . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' . In a low interest environment like we have now , dividends are being reduced from what was illustrated . Many clients who expected to stop paying premiums and instead pay them via the dividend values in their policy can not do so yet since the dividend values are not sufficient to offset premiums .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
what happens to my life insurance when I retire ? If the life insurance is provided by your employer it will depend on what they offer . It might end immediately , it might carry on into retirement or you might be offered to carve out an individual policy from the group plan . There is n't a single answer as plans are different . If you `` own '' the policy what happens to your life insurance is what ever you want to have happen to it .
Neither is ` best ' in terms of comparing one against the other . What you need to look at is what you are going to count on this insurance plan for and why you need it . Term insurance is better for covering large amounts for shorter periods of time , such as putting a policy in place to ensure your children -LRB- or grandchildren -RRB- will have money for college should something happen to you prior to them completing college . Or you could set up a policy that would pay off your mortgage and/or other debts so you do n't leave those behind in the event something happens prior to them being paid off . Whole Life insurance is better for establishing long term wealth accumulation . Here 's an example of the way I set up one of my customers . Since it is possible to have multiple policies , we set up a 10 year term policy listingtheir children as beneficiaries to guarantee they have money for college . We also calculated how much income they would potentially earn during that 10 year period and included that amount so their spouse was n't left without income . Then we set upa 20 year term policy equal to the amount of theirhome mortgage so that would be paid off and calculated who much income they would earn during this next 10 year period.Finally , we establisheda whole life policy witha small face valueto help establishan estate for theirheirs . Since the whole life policy pays out the face value or the cash value , whichever is higher , the ` death benefit ' of the whole life policy increased as time went on . We also established that when the 10 year policy expired , if their income level permitted , they would continue making those monthly payments , but they would add that to the Whole Life policy . Doing this dramatically increased the cash accumulation of that policy after the 10 year mark . So my recommendation for you is to meet with a qualified insurance agent or financial planner to establish the right scenario for you and your family .
That is a great question ! Unlike a whole life policy , which ends when you do , term policies almost always end before you do . It 's why they are so cheaply offered , statistically , the companies rarely have to pay out , compared to whole life policies . So when they do end , you have really only three choices : walk away as if there never was a policy , -LRB- since there is nothing contractually obligating either of you anymore , in the typical policy case -RRB- , hope that the policy has a conversion clause -LRB- one that allows your paid premiums to be converted to a paid up whole life policy with a greatly reduced face value -RRB- , or you renew the policy . If you choose the latter , be prepared for the policy to renew in one year terms , and for the price to go up exponentially each time . They get very expensive very quickly . This can be a real problem if it happens when age or health issues prevent you from finding another company that will write you . This is often the case with the term policies that companies like AARP and AAA offer , policies that end when you turn 80 . With life expectancy now averaging years longer than 80 , and the increasing costs as you age , more and more Elder citizens find themselves out a lot of money , and with no protection . Please be careful when you are looking at these kinds of policies , okay ? Thanks for asking !
This depends on what is happening with the annuity when someone dies and what type of annuity -LRB- owner or annuitant driven -RRB- we 're talking about . For an annuity that is not paying income and the owner is the annuitant -LRB- i.e. the type of contract wo n't matter -RRB- , the cash value of the annuity will be paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- in the contract . If the annuity have been annuitized -LRB- i.e. is paying an income stream -RRB- the chosen option will determine what happens . For life only annuity payments , the payments will stop and no further money will be paid out . For period certain annuities , the income will continue until the period certain has ended . For life with a refund -LRB- installment or lump sum cash -RRB- than the refund will pay the the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- until the cash value of the annuity has been paid out in full to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- .
Really nothing happens when a life insurance policy lapses . That is to say the policy ends and there is no more insurance . There are a couple things that should happen = you should be notified that the policy is going to lapse and it should be explained how you can prevent that from happening . If the premiums are not paid up to keep the policy in force and it does lapse you should be notified of the provision to reinstate the policy and what steps to take and the time limit within which they must be taken .
This is another one of those should n't you ask Suze about ? Suze Orman believes in term insurance for the most part . Her background is as a stockbroker , not as an insurance agent . Her views are shaped by the industry she started in . After the MEC laws came about in the late 80 's , you could n't find many stockbrokers who recommended anything other than term insurance . Probably the biggest reason behind this recommendation was term insurance freed more money for investments which they got paid on , so it made perfect sense to encourage the purchase of term insurance as it freed short term money for investment . The problem is when your investments do n't earn 12 % every year and year after year , things may not work out the way you want . You may find you need life insurance longer than you thought . The real problem with following any financial guru , even if their advice is sound , is what happens when things go off path 10 % or 20 % ? Does the plan collapse ? Was all the investment return earned just you could pay a much higher premium in your old age because you bought term as a young person ? It 's an odd thing to think about in planning but simply ask what happens if you 're wrong ? How much damage hits you if you guessed wrong about the future ? This means taking a broader approach to planning , spreading risk and return to have things work out in different markets . A racing scull is faster than a rowboat , but when a wave hits and flips the racing scull over , but rocks the rowboat , which was a better choice for the body of water ?
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
In the public understanding of the word `` Term '' there is much confusion . In the insurance world term defines the period of coverage with just enough premium to pay for the risk of death and handling costs . Since there is no extra premium beyond this minimal cost factor there is no cash value and at the end of the period the insurance expires the same as insurance on your car , home or liability . The misconception comes when persons get this `` term '' mixed up with paid up policies that are paid up at the end of a certain period . These paid up policies require much more premium and in a nation that has known a lot of inflation are usually not a good buy from a financial standpoint . One of the better types of Life Insurance in today 's market is the Universal Life which can be made into term , paid up insurance , retirement life and many other options . The Universal Life policy puts the policy owner in control but it also means that the policy owner must completely understand the provisions in the policy or it can actually work against the owner . It also means that the financial planner must stay in close contact with the policy owner through out their lifetime . This would be even more true when the financial planner uses term in a total financial program for individuals .
It may be possible for a car insurance company to `` short rate '' your requested cancellation which means that they would retain a certain small percentage above and beyond what has been fully earned for the term and refund you the balance . That had been a more common practice years ago but for the most part , that does n't happen too much any more . For the most part , your policy would be cancelled as requested and the appropriate refund of any pre paid premium returned to you without any additional charge . Naturally , the amount of refund would be determined by the amount you had pre paid or the term and where you happen to be in that term .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Does Renters Insurance Cover ?
A renters insurance policy will typically provide coverage for your personal property less your policy deductible in the event of a covered loss -LRB- fire , smoke , and lightning to name a few -RRB- . Liability coverage is normally also part of the policy that may provide coverage in the event that someone is hurt while in your rented premise that you are deemed responsible for . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If you apartment was on fire and all your personal belongings were gone , where will you stay temporally ? Renters insurance will provide you with temporal hotel accommodation . If you were having a party at your apartment and one your guest slips and falls on your wet kitchen floor and breaks their hip and ambulance came took them to hospital and the medical bill is $ 28,000 . Now who do think is responsible for that ? YOU my friend ! Let say you loaded you car with your personal stuff worth say $ 5000 going on vacation to Florida . You car overheats at point and caught on fire and both your car and its content are gone . Assuming you have physical damage insurance on your car , your car insurance company with replace the fair market value of vehicle minus any applicable deductible . They will not replace your vehicle content of $ 5000 . If you had renters insurance for your apartment , they will cover your personal stuff in vehicle .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance will cover your personal property up to the limits of your policy . For example if you have $ 50,000 in personal property coverage in the policy and all your clothes and furniture were destroyed in the fire then you would be able to claim that as a loss . Renters Insurance only covers your personal property and does not cover the structure . It will also cover for losses for theft . Lets say you had your lap top from home in your car and someone broke in your car and stole the computer then you could file that as a claim on your renters insurance policy . Some renters insurance also covers for Loss of Use and Personal Property off premises . This may not be available from ever insurance carrier .
A renter 's policy is the same as a homeowner 's policy except that it does not cover the building itself . You should have largely the same expectations from a renter 's policy as you woulda homeowner 's policy . So in the event of a covered claim you could be compensated for your physical loss of possessionsas well asextra living expenses associated with having to move afterthe claim . Renter 's policies also provide liability coverage to you and your family . This is very broad coverage that could cover anything from slip and trip exposures around the house to certain misfortunes that happen away from home as well . Talk to your broker to find out everything a renter 's policy covers and what endorsements you need .
You really need to turn this one around and focus on what renters insurance does cover . Then , you can analyze your needs and interests in relation to what is covered and what is not and make your decisions accordingly . If you feel that you have a need for protection for something that does not appear to be covered in the policy , you might be able to add it through an endorsement , for an additional sum of money . An independent local agent can help you with this type of assessment . I think you will find that renters insurance coverage is fairly broad for many typical loss types in relation to renting , including often overlooked but very important liability coverage .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
Yes an apartment complex can require you to obtain renters insurance as a condition of renting their apartment . What apartments are concerned about is liability protection . Should the tenant be liable for bodily injury or property damage the apartment complex does not want to be the first in line to be sued for something the tenant caused . Instead the tenants renters insurance policy will defend against the loss first . The apartment complex will not care if you chose to carry coverage for your own personal property . Also on a side note if the tenant did not carry renters insurance and was sued for a loss , just because the apartment complex may have to defend does not give a free pass to the tenant . Your still going to court and it can cost you thousands . Renters insurance is very inexpensive and covers you for so much . Buy it .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Owning A Pitbull Raise Homeowners Insurance ?
Most insurance companies do not surcharge for animals . Instead they exclude certain breeds , restrict payment on others and/or decline the property completely . Dog bites are a major problem for insurance companies and they are more likely to deny coverage and exclude coverage for certain breeds should you purchase the animal following the start of the policy .
Yes it does . You have liability coverage on your Renter 's policy . It usually comes with $ 100,000 of coverge which would cover a dogbite . This is why the agent will ask you if you own adog and what kind . Many companies will not insure you if you own certain breeds such as Pitbulls or Rottweilers .
Great question . While pitbulls are great dogs for the most part insurance companies tend not to like to insure them . You will have a very hard time to get to cover you dog in your home insurance policy . Most insurance companies have a list of dogs they will not insure and pitbulls are on almost all of them .
That is going to depend on the insurance carrier . Each carrier maintains it 's own list of animals that it considers to be higher risk . Some of the dog breeds that tend to be on many of the lists are : pitbulls , german shepards , anddobermans to name just a few . Contact your local agent to discuss the effect that certain dog breeds mayhave on your homeowners insurance coverage and pricing .
Pitbulls are an excluded breed under many homeowners and renters policies . There are companies out there though that will had dog liability as a separate policy as long as you and the dog meet the carrier 's expectations for coverage . Contact a local agent to find out more about coverage availability and pricing within your geographic location .
It is possible that pitbulls may be an excluded breed under the terms and conditions of your policy . The best way to determine that , of course , is to check with your insrance professional . Some companies who limit breeds may also allow them provided that you can show proof of the dog successfully compleeting a comprehensive training program .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Most homeowners policies have an annual adjustment for the increased costs of construction . This raises the limits in the policy which also raises the premium . With each passing year the home grows older and that also affects the premium . Companies often reward customers who do not have claims and those discounts can have a substantial effect on your premium . Occasionally companies will file for and receive from the state insurance commissioner permission to raise the rates in a specific area due to losses that exceed the premiums received .
It is possible , depending on your carrier . However , items like trampolines , swimming pools , swing sets etc , even if they do n't raise your homeowners insurance rate , certainly raise your liability exposure . For that reason , it is important to review the amount of liability protection your policy provides . Do you have enough if someopne got hurt and you were sued ? Be sure to have thecoverage that you need by increasing the liability coverage in your Homeowners policy and look into buying extra coverage in a Personal Umbrella Liability Policy . These begin coverage at $ 1,000,000 and can be increased as needed .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
That is an excellent question , and one that I get asked a lot ! There are a couple of things that you can do to get your insurance rate lowered . The best is to continue to have a claim and ticket free driving record . If your record is clean , many companies will offer a discount . If yours does n't then tell them you are going to drop the policy and switch , and see if that will motivate them to work with you on the rate , or to match the rate of the company you will switch to . -LRB- many will -RRB- . Another way is to add your other policies to your auto insurer 's company . Having multiple cars or policies with the same company will result usually in substantial discounts on all of the policies . The last way , and one I caution you on , is to raise the amount of your deductible . If it is $ 500 now , and you can afford to pay a $ 1000 if you need to , then raise it to $ 750 or $ 1,000 , and get a lower rate . If you 'd have a hard time coming up with $ 500 , I 'd not advise raising it , especially if you 've filed claims before . Ask your agent to help , they are good that way , and thank you for asking !
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
It may . It is very difficult to say with absolute certainty as each carrier sets it 's own equations that determine their rate for any policy . Having a dog does raise the possiblity of having a liability claim due to a dog bite . Almost all carriers will ask if a prospect owns a dog and the breed of the dog . Contact a local agent to discuss coverage availablity and pricing within your area .
What does life insurance provide ? For me , piece of mind and control . The piece of mind comes from the fact that I have thought about my family and had taken steps to provide for them if for any reason I pass away . The control part comes from the type of life insurance I chose to own . I own whole life . The insurance company ca n't raise the premium on me , ca n't do anything to the policy without my consent and the policy ca n't go backwards in cash values . That 's what life insurance provides me . It may be something entirely different for someone else .
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
Full coverage on auto insurance covers the physical damage done to YOUR vehicle . Liability coverage only will cover claims brought against you in an accident . `` Full coverage '' has two parts , comprehensive coverage -LRB- if a tree falls on your car , or a hail storm does damage to your vehicle , basically most occurrences when you are not in the vehicle -RRB- , and collision coverage , which covers the physical damage done to your vehicle in an accident . You can choose to get comprehensive only , or comprehensive and collision , but not collision without comprehensive . Note : the deductibles for each can be different . You will typically save more money by raising your collision deductible compared to raising your comprehensive deductible .
This question is kind of vague . I am assuming that you are talking about your premium for your homeowners policy . The easiest way to lower the premium for your homeowners policy is to raise your deductible . Another way would be to shop your coverage with other carriers within your area .
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
There are many reasons why your premium may be increasing . If you have recently put in a claim , that may be a factor for increases . Depending on where you live , and depending on the volume of claims that occur in your state , you may see resulting increases in premium to help counter the amount of losses that have taken place . Another reason may be that your insurance provider is raising your dwelling limits to properly cover you in the event of a loss . Insurance carriers will raise coverage often to ensure that if there is a loss , that you will have adequate coverage to replace your home . They have to do this because as time goes by , the cost of building supplies increases , as does the cost to actually build . If you would like to look into lowering your premium , I would recommend contacting your local insurance professional , or reach out to your respective insurance carrier and tell them you would like to look at some options to lower your rates . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Should You Look For In Long Term Care Insurance ?
Every product purchase has a value proposition to assess , but the most critical items are the long term care insurance companys financial and claims paying ability as well as the contractual language in the policy relating to the triggering of policy benefits . The contractual language can be a daunting read for a consumer . It is recommended to secure a long term care expert to review the policy benefits and how the work
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Before buying long term care insurance , it is a good idea to look at the area in which you anticipate you will be living when you reach the age where long term care may be needed , and see what their average rates for assisted living and nursing home care run . Talk to your family and get their ideas on arrangements if that type of care was needed . Review your budget and determine how much you have to spend on long term care , and tell that to your agent when you start . An agent can save you a lot of time and frustration from looking at all kinds of bells and whistles that you can not afford , when they know your budget from the start . These are some things that will help your long term care search start off on a good foot .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
People who have very few assets and/or income should probably not get long term care insurance . If there are immediate needs that will go unmet because you are concerned about a possible long term care stay in the future , then the cost of long term care insurance may not be worth it . Also , if you may perhaps go on Medicaid in the future , even without needing long term care services , you should not purchase long term care insurance , in most situations .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For Smoking Cessation ?
Medicare will not pay for smoking cessation products such as nicotine substitutes -LRB- Nicorette gum , nicotine patch , etc -RRB- , and Medicare will not pay for pills that reduce the craving to smoke . But Medicare will pay for up to 8 face-to-face smoking cessation counseling sessions with a qualified Medicare doctor during a 12 month period .
Medicare will not pay for smoking cessation products such as nicotine substitutes -LRB- Nicorette gum , nicotine patch , etc -RRB- , and Medicare will not pay for pills that reduce the craving to smoke . But Medicare will pay for up to 8 face-to-face smoking cessation counseling sessions with a qualified Medicare doctor during a 12 month period .
Medicare will not pay for Nicorette gum or patch , or other smoking cessation products . When making the effort to quit smoking , Medicare will pay forup to 8 face-to-face smoking cessation counseling sessions with a qualified Medicare doctor during a 12 month period .
The answer to your question will vary from health insurance carrier to health insurance carrier and may also be determined by whether your employer 's coverage is self-funded and they have made a determination about the coverage of nicotine gum . Coverage for smoking cessationprograms has almost universally been adopted by health insurance carriers for its obvious positive effects on the health of their members . However , what treatments and medications they will cover for smoking cessation are determined by each insurance carrier and are not uniform across the industry . You should check with your health insurance provider 's customer service department to get more detailed information about what your coverage is in this regard . My general experience is that the nicotine patch is more likely to be covered than nicotine gum . Also , there are several prescription medications that are available for use in smoking cessation and you may find that some or all of these are covered by your health insurance .
Zyban is chemically similar to Buproprion . Both medications are used to treat depression but also can be used as part of a smoking cessation program . Buproprion is covered by Medicare Part D and does not require prior authorization from your carrier . Zyban may be prescribed by your doctor as part of a smoking cessation program if other treatment protocols have not worked . Medicare Part D may require prior authorization .
Health insurance cost more for smokers om most medical plans . The exception is a `` short-term '' policy with selected carriers . For temporary policies , often the smoking status is not considered in determining the rate . When State Exchanges/Marketplaces begin offering coverage -LRB- You should continue to purchase coverage through a broker and/or their website -RRB- in 2014 , smoking will impact all plans . Although any existing conditions will not impact the rate , smoking will . So if you can stop , it will save money . If you ca n't , many smoking cessation expenses will be covered under the new plans .
Smokers are considered a health risk and unfortunately will always pay a higher premium . The serious health conditions that are associated with smoking means smokers have a shorter life expectancy . If one is a smoker the best course of action would be to seek some type of smoking cessation program . One small word of advice ; if your option is the electronic cigarette this will show up in the para-meds as nicotine usage . In some cases it will afford you a lower premium however your rating class with most insurance companies will be listed as smoker .
The answer to your question will vary from insurance carrier to insurance carrier . While smoking cessation program coverage has become almost standard in health insurance policies , the approved methods and medications are determined by each health insurance carrier . As such , there is no simple , Yes or No answer to your question . You will need to check with your insurance carrier to determine what your plan with them covers and the steps you need to take to have your efforts to stop smoking covered . In general terms , nicotine patches seem to be more favored by health insurance carriers than nicotine gum . Also , there are several prescription medications that are approved for smoking cessation and are generally covered under the pharmacy benefit of most health insurers .
As a general rule , Medicare does not cover hypnotherapy . If your doctor or therapist recommends hypnosis for weight loss or smoking cessation , the treatment is not covered . But in some cases Medicare can pay for hypnotherapy . If hypnosis is used in conjunction with treatment for PTSD or pain management it may be a covered expense .
It depends on your policy but more and more companies are paying for smoking cessation programs prescribed by a doctor . It depends on the company so check with your agent or call the company to receive a more definitive answer to your question . Your agent or customer service can help you .
If you purchase individual health insurance , you may have toask your agent to check individual policies in your area , as there is no `` mandated '' benefit for smoking cessation . When Healthcare Reform rolls around , it may be included as a preventive benefit , but that has not been defined yet .
Under the new Affordable Care Act , many smoking cessation programs and related items may be covered under your private or group health insurance plan . Although the degree of benefits may vary , there 's a good chance you can get some reimbursement . Simply check with your current carrier or if applying for a new policy through experienced brokers such as us , simply ask and we will check the insurers in your area . Full-time experienced brokers are always a great resource !
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Your sleep apnea must have been diagnosed by a physician and verified by a doctor prescribed sleep study in a Medicare approved facility . Some mild forms of apnea can be treated with devices , weight loss , cessation of tobacco use . But in some cases surgery may provide relief . If your condition warrants it , Medicare will pay for surgery . Your doctor can advise you about your options .
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
It is amazing how a life insurance company can find out you smoke . They test urine and blood for cotinine/nicotine , if you take an exam . They usually do a phone interview if you do n't take an exam , so you have to state your smoking status both in writing and verbally . They may order medical records . I once had a client who turned out to be rated a smoker , and when I asked him about it , he said he did n't think there was any way the insurance company would find out because he did n't smoke for a month before the exam and even his doctor did not know he was a smoker . It turned out his wife had told his doctor he smoked ! He may have been able to contest that by taking a new exam , but he , of course , was back to smoking by then . If you smoke , just admit it . If you quit smoking later , you can apply for a rate reduction a year after smoking .
The term life insurance brokerage market is fiercely competitive and offers a range of guaranteed premium periods like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . The non-rated health classifications are based on two categories : non-smoking and smoking . The non-smoking category is segmented into five sub categories : super preferred , preferred plus , preferred , standard plus and standard . The smoking category is segmented into three sub categories : preferred smoking , smoking and no-cigarette tobacco . Then theres the impaired risk categories classify mortality charges of insureds below the standard ratings , up to 16 tables . Your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition are all mitigating factors in premium pricing term life insurance . A nonsmoking super preferred male or female , age 25 purchasing 10 year guaranteed level term life insurance for $ 100,000 of coverage will pay around $ 80-85 a year .
Fully underwritten life insurance policies require you to declare whether or not you use any tobacco products . Although cigars and pipes are smoked , the question seems to suggest cigarettes . Cigarette smoking shortens life expectancy , so smokers pay more for life insurance . If smoking is declared on the application and the life insurance company offers an underwriting decision after the due diligence process , a death claim will be paid . If the insured takes up smoking after the policy has been issued as a nonsmoker , the life insurance company will pay the claim . It is the circumvention of truth that may indeed be classified as fraud that could void the policy in certain states or reduce the death benefit based on smoker rates at the date of issue . Some occasional smokers attempt to beat the urine analysis detection of cotinine , the byproduct of nicotine , by not smoking 8-10 days before the exam banking on their body chemistry to purge the continine from their systems . But you would have to lie on the application . And again , lying on the application could be considered fraud in some states . My advice : There is one life insurance company that offers nonsmoking rates to smokers for three years in an attempt to give the insured time to quit smoking . We can help with that . But bottom line : do n't try to game the system .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Unfortunately , that is too broad a question to give a specific answer . I can however , point you in the right direction . Smoking status is just one factor in assessing risks and setting rates . Smokers usually will pay more than non-smokers . The reason for the word usually , as opposed to definitely , is that in Canada some companies approach smoking differently . In other words , they charge smokers different rates based on what and how much they smoke . For example , cigar smokers are generally permitted to smoke 1 cigar a month with many companies to still be considered `` non-smokers '' for insurance purposes . I suspect it is for purely competitive reasons for cigar-smoking golfers . However , a more realistic approach is allowing 50 cigars a year which some companies take . I suggest that you look at the online quoting services to get an idea and then work with a local independent agent / broker to get the right policy at the right price . It is very important that you are truthful when declaring your smoking status as the company can deny your claim if you are not . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Eoi For Life Insurance ?
EOI in life insurance stands for `` evidence of insurability '' . When you are taking an exam to get a life insurance , you are providing evidence of insurability . It is whatever is required to show that you are qualified to obtain that policy . When life insurance does not require EOI , that can make the policy very expensive , as in guaranteed issue life insurance , which has no evidence of insurability requirements . However , sometimes no EOI can be a perk . E.g Many term policies offer the opportunity to convert them to permanent policies without evidence of insurability . That is a perk , especially if your health deteriorates and you can not qualify for a new term policy . It is a double perk in that the converted permanent policy will be rated the same as your term policy was .
EOI stands for `` Evidence of Insurability '' . EOI shows the insurer that the insured person meets the health and risk criteria required by that company in order to get a certain policy . Group life insurance plans might not require EOI for a certain amount of life insurance , but then require EOI for additional coverage , or coverage for family members . Most privately purchased policies do have EOI requirements of some kind , although they can vary widely from simply answering a few questions to having a full medical exam done .
EOI in life insurance stands for `` evidence of insurability '' . When you are taking an exam to get a life insurance , you are providing evidence of insurability . It is whatever is required to show that you are qualified to obtain that policy . When life insurance does not require EOI , that can make the policy very expensive , as in guaranteed issue life insurance , which has no evidence of insurability requirements . However , sometimes no EOI can be a perk . E.g Many term policies offer the opportunity to convert them to permanent policies without evidence of insurability . That is a perk , especially if your health deteriorates and you can not qualify for a new term policy . It is a double perk in that the converted permanent policy will be rated the same as your term policy was .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
If you were to cover every contingency of life with life insurance , you probably could not afford that much . Life insurance is a wonderful resource for the `` what if 's '' of life , but the `` what if 's '' can be endless . What if you died leaving your family without your income . What if before you died , you used up all your savings on doctor bills . Then , what if your spouse died shortly after you . What if the person you designated to care for your children , had just lost their job . What if ... . No one can have enough life insurance to cover every possible tragedy . But you can have enough life insurance to give your loved ones a chance . Providing them with enough income to give them time to adjust to life without you , without having to worry about getting a new job -LRB- or adding a second job to the one they already have -RRB- , is a good place to start . Giving them enough to live on until your children are grown , or for 10 years , is also a reasonable amount .
A nearly impossible question to answer . How much premium can you afford ? What carrier are you purchasing coverage with ? What is your health/medical history ? What is your family/medical history ? What is your occupation ? What is your geographic location ? What is you age ? What is you height/weight ? These are just some of the factors used to determine the amount of coverage and the premium that you would pay for that coverage ; that a carrier might use . Most carriers will handle coverage rates up to one million on a regular basis . Contact a local agent to find out what would be available to you .
here is a good chance you will . Lets cover some of the what ifs : What if you need to maximize your pension distribution by taking it out during your lifetime only ? Life insurance will help you cover your spouse . What if you have any remaining debts , such as a second mortgage ? Or if you have any dependents , such as a child who still need some financial assistance ? Life insurance would protect them . What if you want a really strong guaranteed portion of your asset portfolio ? The guarantees in life insurance cash value contracts are very competitive . What if your net worth is high and you want to preserve your estate from federal and state taxation ? Life insurance would allow you to protect your assets and still pay the government . What if you have formed very strong ties with a charity , and would like to support it as a legacy ? Life insurance can turn a comparatively small premium into a very substantial gift for them . Its kind of surprising , isnt it , about how our need for life insurance can basically last our entire life !
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
It depends on many factors , but here are the main factors for price . 1 -RRB- What 's the policy type ? 2 -RRB- What 's the face amount ? 3 -RRB- What 's your gender ? 4 -RRB- What 's your age ? 5 -RRB- What 's your general health like ? 6 -RRB- Are you a tobacco user ? What you should look at are basically two main questions . What does the life insurance cover and how much do I need ? Cost is a factor for a policy , but it 's much more important to get the right policy with the riders you 'll need .
1 . Is there an annual deductible ? 2 . What is the maximum annual out of pocket costs ? 3 . What does it cost to see a doctor ? 4 . What is the cost of lab work and x-rays ? 5 . What is the cost of outpatient surgery ? 6 . What is the cost of a hospital stay ? 7 . What are the wellness benefits ? 8 . What do prescription drugs cost ? The most important question to ask with respect to buying health insurance now is are my doctors in the network ?
Where you should buy Term Life is from an independent life insurance broker . What type depends on a number of factors : what you want the coverage to cover , for how long , is there a chance you would want to convert the coverage to permanent . I suggest you contact an independent life insurance broker who can give you a quote after discussing what the coverage is needed for . Do not forget to ask what are your options when the term renews . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Typically , yes . But lets cover some of the what ifs . What if you had no history of cancer , but then unfortunately come down with it after you take the policy ? Youre covered . What if you had a history of cancer , but didnt disclose it to the broker when you applied ? Nor did you tell him or the examiner about any doctors who treated you ? Thats a big no-no . Thats insurance fraud . The carrier could contest the claim in the first two years . To tell you the truth , they might even come after you after that . What if you just completed cancer treatment last year ? Carriers typically like to wait 2 to 5 years before making an offer . However , I have seen offers made sooner , under exceptional conditions . What if you are a woman , and you have no history of breast cancer , but it runs in your family ? With all other things being equal , you could certainly be eligible for coverage now . But the family history might preclude you from getting the rock-bottom rates -LRB- sorry - blame the actuaries :-RRB- What if you have an accident-only policy ? No coverage for illnesses such as cancer . But what if you had cancer , but tragically the cause of death was a plane crash ? Different story .
Only you can answer this question of Life Insurance being essential . For those of us who see the financial loss in families who lost a parent or spouse , Life Insurance relieves financial stress allowing you to take care of what is most important , your family . YES , I believe life insurance is essential . Life Insurance provides you or rather your beneficiary with monies otherwise would not be available . You need to look at what is important in your life , who depends on you , your family , perhaps your business and look at what will happen if you are not there `` tomorrow '' . What will happen financially and how would you relieve that financial stress .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Companies Will Issue Life Insurance To The Mentally Ill ?
None that I know of will underwrite a mentally impaired person . It goes back to basic contract law and both parties being of sound mind to contract together . In fact when dealing with seniors these days an agent must be sure the senior is of sound mind when doing any financial work . Often , a agent will include family members of the client in the discussion . Dementia is something that can come on quickly and courts have ruled against agents who may have sold products to seniors who not much later on , suffered from dementia .
People with many forms of mental illness can get life insurance . Bear in mind that this term can cover a wide range of impairments . I know firsthand that many of them are insurable . A lot of it boils down to the need for the life insurance . Almost anybody can qualify for a burial policy . Depending on the age of the insured , and the state of residence , a number of small policies could be available . Wont cost too much , and gets the job done . But what if you need more substantial coverage ? For example , I worked with a family who had an adult son who is mentally retarded . He was reasonably self-sufficient . He actually worked for his father part-time , and did missionary work first church . He had the skills and personality to go door-to-door and spread his gospel . The insurance company gave us money for not just final expenses , but then some for the family . There was a co-dependence there that was insurable . You can see that people who are mentally ill can establish themselves as a valued member of the group . The members of the group therefore have an insurable interest in them , and deserve money to compensate for their loss . And this could include people with many other impairments . Autism , depression , severe anxiety , PTSD . ADD . OCD . People with any and all of these can be fairly high functioning , and therefore insurable . Dont forget one other important item : planning for people with special needs . Folks with impairments can be functional , but can also remain dependent on their family members . What if those family members die ? Life insurance is needed on on the parents , or responsible siblings , so that the dependent family member can remain self-sufficient . Now , with regard to the choice of carrier : there is not a hot list of companies that take people with mental illness . Potential applicants need to be prequalified to identify the carrier with the most interest in this particular case at this particular time . And that could change from quarter to quarter , or from year-to-year . It is the job of the broker to know which companies like which types of cases .
Getting life insurance with mental illness is a very broad category and the premiums can range from the top Preferred category -LRB- for mild depression -RRB- to being uninsurable -LRB- for a younger adult who is institutionalized due to mental illness , upon which there are no guaranteed issue options that I am aware of due to age -RRB- . A simple rule of thumb for medically underwritten life insurance for mental illness of any type is , can the person with mental illness hold down a steady full time job . If the mental illness is so well controlled by medication or therapy as to make that possible , or there is no need of treatment in order to live a normal life , then usually that person can obtain a medically underwritten life insurance policy . If someone is on Disability for the express purpose of mental illness , simplified and guaranteed issue plans are available . Of course , other factors come into play in deciding what type of policy the person with mental illness can get , and finding his/her best price . There include whether there has been a hospitalization for mental illness , suicidal thoughts or attempt , multiple medications needed for one diagnosis , etc. . But the vast majority of persons with mental illness can get life insurance .
If the mental illness is a pre-existing condition , a new Disability Insurance policy might not cover it . If you got the Disability Insurance before being diagnosed with the mental illness , check your policy 's wording to see if it covers disability due to mental illness . If a group policy , most limit Disability benefits for mental illness to a duration of two years .
People with many forms of mental illness can get life insurance . Bear in mind that this term can cover a wide range of impairments . I know firsthand that many of them are insurable . A lot of it boils down to the need for the life insurance . Almost anybody can qualify for a burial policy . Depending on the age of the insured , and the state of residence , a number of small policies could be available . Wont cost too much , and gets the job done . But what if you need more substantial coverage ? For example , I worked with a family who had an adult son who is mentally retarded . He was reasonably self-sufficient . He actually worked for his father part-time , and did missionary work first church . He had the skills and personality to go door-to-door and spread his gospel . The insurance company gave us money for not just final expenses , but then some for the family . There was a co-dependence there that was insurable . You can see that people who are mentally ill can establish themselves as a valued member of the group . The members of the group therefore have an insurable interest in them , and deserve money to compensate for their loss . And this could include people with many other impairments . Autism , depression , severe anxiety , PTSD . ADD . OCD . People with any and all of these can be fairly high functioning , and therefore insurable . Dont forget one other important item : planning for people with special needs . Folks with impairments can be functional , but can also remain dependent on their family members . What if those family members die ? Life insurance is needed on on the parents , or responsible siblings , so that the dependent family member can remain self-sufficient . Now , with regard to the choice of carrier : there is not a hot list of companies that take people with mental illness . Potential applicants need to be prequalified to identify the carrier with the most interest in this particular case at this particular time . And that could change from quarter to quarter , or from year-to-year . It is the job of the broker to know which companies like which types of cases .
Yes you can . It depends on the mental illness , medications , and medical history what type of policy you need to go with . Worse case you can go with a guaranteed issue plan . There are some simplified issue plans that may fit or if the problem is mild you may even be able to get a fully underwritten plan . You need to sit down with an experienced independent agent who can evaluate the details of your case and help you find the best plan for you . It would also be a good idea to have a trusted friend or relative present if your mental illness impedes your judgement in any way .
If your health insurance policy is not a grandfathered plan put in place before the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- provisions went into effect and certainly if you have enrolled in a major medical policy after January 1 , 2014 then the answer is `` Yes '' . Under the ACA law health insurance plans must treat mental health and substance abuse problems as any other illness . In addition , there are now provisions for preventive care services in relation to some mental illnesses , depression screening and behavioral assessments for example , that must be covered at no cost to the member . A policy holder should carefully examine the provisions of their own policy or call their insurance carrier 's member services department to verify what services are covered , where they are covered and what coverage provisions of your contract your needed services are subject to . For example , if you are an individual who enrolled in a Bronze level plan and youneed mental health services that are not preventive in nature but are for actual treatment then it is a virtual certainty that these services will be subject to your plan 's deductible and/or co-insurance provisions before you begin to see the insurance carrier paying for these services . In many cases this could be an amount in excess of $ 6000 before you would cease paying out-of-pocket for any services . Also , verify which mental health/behavioral health providers and facilities are in-network with your provider and determine if you have to be pre-certified to see any of these providers before you seek care in a non-emergency situation .
Golden Rule is a subsidiary of United Healthcare . Golden Rule issues individual major medical plans in select states . Most of the policies do include mental health benefits as required by your state department of insurance . In some cases you may `` buy up '' from the standard mental health benefit to an enhanced plan . The enhanced plan , where offered , replaces the usual limited benefit mental health benefit with one that treats mental health as `` any other illness '' .
Since mental illness covers such a broad range and level of diagnoses and symptoms , that is hard to answer with a general answer . Most companies will cover mild , controlled depression . On the other extreme , an adult institutionalized due to severe MR/ID may need to take a guaranteed issue policy , when old enough to qualify for it . To find out which company will have the lowest price for the person you have in mind , visit a website that specializes in impaired risk and share the details about this person -LRB- age , diagnoses , treatment , etc -RRB- . For an agent who knows what they are doing , it wo n't take them long to find the best company for someone suffering from mental illness .
That is a great question ! The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- has as one of its provisions the mandatory inclusion of mental health coverage . It makes things like depression screenings , and substance abuse treatments available , along with many other services . It also keeps insurers from using mental health issues as pre-existing conditions and denying you coverage . Regardless of how you feel politically about the Affordable Care Act , to those with mental health issues , it has been a blessing . The policies offered under the Government exchange -LRB- www.healthcare.gov -RRB- are required to cover at least some mental health care treatments . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Mental health is covered by most health insurance policies , but NOT all of them . I 'll explain : As a health insurance broker that has more than 33 years of experience -LRB- The time went fast ! -RRB- , this topic is often discussed . Any newly-issued Marketplace -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- policy must contain specific mental health benefits . It is one of the 10 `` essential '' benefits that legislation mandated to be covered . Many `` grandfathered '' plans do not cover these types of benefits , which is perfectly legal . And of course , you may have these types of benefits , but a deductible and/or coinsurance may apply . However , `` short-term '' plans -LRB- that are not ACA-compliant -RRB- are very popular , especially for persons that missed Open Enrollment or simply want no part of the Affordable Care Act . Typically , they do not cover mental illness expenses .
Remember , Disability is basically insurance on your income . If set up correctly , Disability Insurance will pay a % of your income for qualifying sickness and accidents . Mental Health is considered an illness so if a qualified doctor says your Mental Health illness is preventing you from working , you may qualify to receive benefits . Talk to your agent about specifics . If you do not have an agent or representative , feel free to reach out to me .
Under the mental health parity requirements of Federal law -LRB- Mental Health Parity and Addiction Act of 2008 -RRB- and later of ObamaCare , major medical plans must now cover mental health issues the same as they would treat any other medical condition . So , any financial requirements such as copays , deductibles or any treatment limitations -LRB- such as number of visits -RRB- can be no more restrictive for mental health or addiction than for a physical ailment . An important distinction that the reader should be aware of is that the 2008 law applied to employers with 50 or more employees . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this was extended to individual and small group policies sold on or after January 1 , 2014 . It is possible that there are existing `` grandfathered '' policies still in effect that are not subject to these requirements though such policies are becoming fewer and fewer .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
Some policies have limitations on mental health claims while others have full coverage . Some companies will limit claims to mental and nervous disorders to 2 years . It really depends on the company you have . If you are buying a new policy , be sure to ask an agent if the policy you buy at has `` full mental and nervous coverage '' .
This really depends on who you ask ! We all have a our favorite companies but the `` best '' company is the one that will pay a claim if you became disabled ! I would look for a company that has a good reputation , is highly rated , and is priced reasonably . Also , remember to look into exactly what a policy will cover . For example , some insurance companies will only pay 2 years for a disability from a mental or nervous disorder . However you can find other insurance companies that will pay for the entire benefit period for a mental or nervous disorder . Feel free to contact me with any other questions !
end question
start question
health-insurance
Why Is Health Insurance So Expensive In New York ?
This question was asked before implementation of the Affordable Care Act , but the answer highlights important features of the new law : coverage for preexisting conditions , and the mandate to purchase . Health insurance in NY was expensive because laws required insurers to issue policies regardless of health . Healthy people were not required to purchase a policy . Eventually only the sickest people enrolled in the plans , forcing premiums very high . The Affordable Care Act includes a mandate for health people to purchase coverage . It remains to be seen if the penalty for being uninsured is stiff enough to avoid what happened in NY .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
This really is a critical question . But let 's ask it in reverse to cut to the chase . Which life insurance company denies the fewest claims ? That 's what you really want to know , right ? The Life Insurance Company that denies the fewest claims , and always resolves gray areas in favor of the insured and their claim , is New York Life . They also are the Life Insurance Company that pays claims the very fastest , usually within one week . I check the daily reports and see just how much is paid out every single day by New York Life . They brag about their quick payment on claims and about not fighting on claims when there is a possible basis to pay . They is one reason New York Life has the very highest ratings , along with its highest financial ratings . You should talk with an experienced agent to make a decision . Remember though that New York Life policies are ONLY sold by New York Life Agents , so do not expect anyone else to recommend them . They simply can not sell them . Love to hear fromyou.Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
To buy life insurance in New York , you can go to a website that offers it , look through your Yellow Pages and call an agency , or ask friends , relatives or co-workers for a referral . When purchasing online , you can use the quote engines and put in New York to see if they offer policies there . New York has its own companies so not every agency does business there .
Matt is correct . New York Life is an independent national insurance company . We are a mutual company , meaning our policy holders own our company , and we are not beholden to Stock Holders , so we can have lower rates and better service . In addition to Term Policies , we offer our flagship Whole Life Policies , along with Long Term Care Insurance , Annuities , Pension Replacements , College Funding , a variety of Retirement Plans . For details , call a New York Life Agent . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
No , Health Insurance DOES NOT cover Long Term Care . Long Term Care needs to be covered through either Long Term Care Insurance , or a Unique Product offered by New York Life called Asset Preserver . New York Life can provide you with Long Term Care Insurance in an extremely large variety of personalized policies , or an Asset Protector which will provide you with Both Life Insurance and Long Term Care in one product . Please call me , Gary Lane , New York Life Agent , for the details that can fit your exact needs .
Car insurance rates in New York are determined by many variables . Some of the most important factors are your driving record -LRB- including other family members -RRB- , your zip code or county , your age , the type of vehicle you drive , your credit history , how the vehicle is used and the types of coverage you carry . Additionally , the company you are insured with plays a big role in determining the rates . So ... how do you get a free quote for car insurance in New York ? A reputable nationwide -LRB- or New York based -RRB- car insurance website will zoom -LRB- pun intended -RRB- you to your destination . Typically , you can compare the best offers and get expert advice at no cost .
Guardian Life Insurance Company of America is a mutual company based in New York City , New York . They also have regional offices all across the northern states , from Washington to New York . Rated A + + by AM Best , Guardian Life Insurance Company has several subsidiaries , including Berkshire Life Insurance Company of America .
Yes , absolutely you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . Without it you would not be following the regulations set by New York Department of Financial Services - Insurance Industry . Before obtaining a license to sell life insurance you must study , take a practice -LRB- proctored -RRB- exam and pass . Then , you must pass the ` real exam ' in order to get a license to sell life insurance in New York .
I am happy to report that New York Life is America 's oldest and largest Mutual Life Insurance Company in America . Being a Mutual Life Insurer , means there are no stockholders to try to please . The Owners are the Policy Holders . This can mean substantial savings for Policy Holders of a Mutual Life Insurer like New York Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life . 9497972424 .
The state of New York is one of the most highly regulated states in the country . Residents of New York general pay more for coverage . It 's critical in securing the best possible price tag by going online to a brokerage firm that has an extension inventory of New York approved careers to secure the best deal .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
New York Life has relationships with a number of other quality insurance companies to offer many products , including disability insurance . Through these arrangements , customers can work with a New York Life agent to obtain a wide variety of products not underwritten by New York Life itself . Disability insurance can provide peace of mind and removes the uncertainty in case of an accident or sickness that makes someone incapable of working . When considering such coverage , one should review both short term and long term options . Business should also consider Disability insurance for key business persons in the business .
Yes . New York Life is a top rated life insurance company . They are a mutual company which means they are owned by their policy owners not Wall Street investors . They are known for their excellent whole-life products . a different division of New York Life sells mail order life insurance which is co-branded by AARP . These are quite different from the New York Life products offered by their agents .
With most life insurance policies the lowest monthly premium they will offer is around $ 15 . The company that is braded as AARP life insurance is actually New York Life . New York Life is a highly rated life insurance company . Many of the life insurance certificates sold by New Your Life will allow for future rate increases so the initial rate MAY only be temporary with that particular company .
New York Life is not a publically traded company . New York Life is a mutual company . This means their policyholders are owners of the company versus publically traded on the stock exchange . Some types ofNew York Life whole life policies even allow voting rights and dividends for the policyholders . There are both plus and minus to mutual companies versus publically traded companies .
As a physician you are most likely earning a fair income and want to be sure to minimize your taxes . The government would like to take most of your money and that of your heirs , but there are some very specific ways to avoid much of that government taking . New York Life allows me to provide you with their Whole Life Insurance , at elevated face amounts , due to your elevated income . With this Whole Life Insurance , you can be certain that your family and other heirs will receive their benefits completely tax free . New York Life will allow you to take out substantial amounts of life insurance , paying a premium which will build up over the years , while accruing interest that is tax deferred to you and tax free to your beneficiary when you die . You can borrow against this growing fund when you wish , and not pay taxes on that money if you decide not to pay it back , but instead allow it to lower the death benefit for the loan . You can also repay it and increase the death benefit as though no loan had been taken . While constantly growing , your beneficiary will be taking your large estate in life insurance , paid by your premium payments , take free to the beneficiary , while passing your estate tax free at up to $ 14,500 per year in tax free premium payments . If your estate is even higher , we can equip you with tax sheltered annuities which can pay you for the rest of your life . Also of note are our Long Term Care Benefits , which you can protect your entire estate with by ensuring you never have to pay for such long term care or be a burden on your family . In short , as your New York Life Agent , I can provide you with a variety of very suitable choices from which to protect your assets and your family , while keeping the tax agents far from your door .
No , they do not . New York Life Insurance is not in the health insurance business . New York Life Insurance focuses on life and disability insurance , long-term care insurance , annuities and retirement planning as well financial services . They have a long and distinguished history but are not a health insurance resource .
end question
start question
health-insurance
When Do We Have To Have Health Insurance ?
The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- states that if you do not have health insurance by January 1st , 2014 you run the risk of paying a penalty . An independent agent can show you plans from all the major carriers and help you determine which plan would best fit your needs . The best part is you the service is free . The insurance carriers by the independent agent for business they write . You save lots of time by looking at lots of plans from many carriers and you get unbiased advice from the independent agent . You can run health insurance quotes on our website by clicking `` other '' and going to under 65 health insurance section . For folks 65 and over they can run Medicare supplement quotes on our website as well .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
I have heard it said that the top life insurance sales people make more money than the top sales people in other industries . This could be true , because large commissions can run it to the millions of dollars . The life insurance business is an ideal environment for making it big . We sell a product that pays well . We represent strong and well established manufactures of this product -LRB- policies -RRB- . We dont have to maintain an inventory . We can develop sales organizations that dont require much labor or overhead . The demand for our services remains constant throughout the ups and downs of the economy . Of course , we have to pay our dues big time . We have to constantly strive to master our field and enhance our professional skills . We have to market , market , market , and then market some more . And we have to invest in every client prior to getting paid . To provide superior service , we need to provide a quote for a rate about which we are confident they will be approved . That can take many hours of work . And remember that life insurance has the most sophisticated and complicated set of eligibility requirements of all financial products . But at the end of the day we know we do outstanding work , and so we earn outstanding pay .
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
When youre asking what insurance do you need when you retire , we need to know if youre asking about Health Insurance or are you talking about protecting your family from loss . If your question pertains to your health insurance because most of us loose that when we retire then you have two options . You can look at either a Medicare Supplement , which works similar to car insurance and what I mean by that is you can buy a plan with no deductible and pay a higher premium , that will cover all of your doctor and hospital expenses or you can assume part of the risk and pay a lower monthly premium with a deductible or co-pay and it will still cover your doctor and hospital expenses . Medicare Supplement will run you anywhere from $ 155 to $ 200 per month so around 2-3 thousand dollar per year to see your doctor 4 to 5 times a year . Some people like this option because their monthly cost is set even when they have a bad health year . The other option you have is to look at a Medicare Advantage plan if its available in your area . Most plans have either low or no monthly premium and small co-pays when you see your doctor or are hospitalized . All plans have a maximum out of pocket to protect you for bad health years so if youre like the average senior and you see your doctor the 4-5 times a year , your health insurance cost will run you under $ 100 . If you were asking about insurance to protect your family from loss then the answer get more complicated because we have to look at what insurance you already have in place , if you have a pension are you looking at taking a full or partial , do you have a 401K , if married when is your spouse going to retire and if it would be better to take their social security now or wait . With out knowing the answers to some of those questions answering that question would just be a blind shot in the dark .
Boy , what a question . For me , it gets to the root of what is wrong with government these days . Im going to speak bluntly because I feel very strongly about this issue . Even though I sell life insurance for a living , I have had extensive experience in the medical insurance marketplace . I am also a consumer , and have to buy the product for myself and my family . And , I am a patriotic American who wants to see our country run the way it should be . Everybody needs medical care . If the insurance marketplace is left to run by its own devices , the vast majority of people will end up with a product that they like , at a price they can afford . If a small minority of people end up without coverage for whatever reason , their needs can be easily addressed . This could take place with a government safety net , an innovation by private companies , or some combination of the above . Either way , everyone will be able to have some form of coverage so that the cost of getting medical attention could be kept affordable . Beyond making sure that healthcare products and services are safe and secure , I cant see why government invention would be needed at all to make this system work . Next point : nobody is entitled to medical insurance . Frankly , nobody is entitled to anything . A government should not be in the business of providing the stuff to which we think we are entitled . The whole notion of government taking care of you from cradle-to-grave is horribly misguided . A gargantuan state and federal bureaucracy can in no way give each and every man , woman and child the treatment they deserve every day of their life . Last point : giving this gargantuan bureaucracy the legal power to force you to do business with it is a travesty of justice . We have made a horrible mistake by giving the federal government the right to tax or penalize us when purchasing health insurance . We have let it get much too cozy with the corporate providers of healthcare . Who exactly is benefiting by this illicit partnership ? Is it you ? Is it me ? Do we actually have the health insurance we need at a price we can afford ? Many Americans do not . So the answer to your question is yes , the United States government can force you to buy health insurance , and we have nobody to blame but ourselves for this sorry state of affairs .
Well , that is a great question ! As I think about it , I realize that I am 5 people rolled into one . -LRB- Perhaps that is why my wife keeps asking me Just who do you think you are ?! :-RRB- We are hunters . We love to go out and find people with whom we can do business . We are personal coaches . We help our clients clarify their values and set priorities . We are field underwriters . We prepare people for going through the formal application process . We are advocates . We fight tooth and nail to get an approval at the rate quoted , and to solve any and all problems that emerge along the way . We are family friends . Processing life insurance claims is hard on everybody . A death in the family is tough to deal with . We are there for the beneficiaries in any way they need - on top of delivering a check to them .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Good question but think about it we need to ask ourselves a few questions before we go cheap sometimes cheap is good we all need to be good stewards of our money so the questions we should ask if answered honestly will be an indicator . Do I eat good healthy food ? Do I drink alcohol ? Do I work out at least 20 minutes 2 times a week ? How is my spiritual life ? Then we can decide which policy fits my need it can be fairly cheap but you must answer the questions and have a good consultant that cares about you not the money the money will come when we serve the people .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
I am answering this question as a consumer , and as someone who is concerned about the state of our country . I sell life insurance for a living , but am very familiar with how the health insurance marketplace works . I think that everybody does need health insurance , but that everybody shouldnt need health insurance . At least not the way we provide it these days . In our current healthcare delivery system , the cost of services is extremely high . Too high , in many cases . There are probably a variety of reasons for this : greed ; cost inefficiencies ; a litigious legal environment ; burdensome government compliance ; etc. . This is not to say that we do not deliver superior services . People from the world over come here to get the best of care . But we pay an arm and a leg for it , and we shouldnt have to . This has made medical insurance the lesser of two evils . Better to have expensive coverage to minimize your out-of-pocket costs , than to go bankrupt or kill your credit record with huge outstanding debt . Or to have too many people exploit the willingness of healthcare providers to provide free service to the needy , and force the rest of us to subsidize their care . But the price of that coverage is often ridiculously high . And too often , we pay for benefits that we never will need . In the best of all worlds , we would optimize the risk-sharing between the individual consumer and the system . Benefit plans would be tailor-made to the greatest extent possible . Young , healthy guys should be able to buy bare-bones catastrophic coverage . Women of childbearing age could have more comprehensive coverage . And on and on . The last thing you want is for politics to dictate benefits according to the agenda of special interest interest groups . One size does not fit all , and it makes the vast majority of us overpay for services we will never use . This is why I am a huge supporter of alternative self-insurance organizations and healing centers . Health insurance is not one of the basic needs of life , contrary to what many politicians will tell you .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
Annuities to keep it simple are great when you have saved for years and want some tax breaks we know that the culture we live in is just taxes , taxes and more taxes.Then you have inflation which will consume your retirement like nothing you have ever seen that 's just a couple reasons to purchase an annuity then add in the higher tax bracket as we age and start our social security and now were being taxed at 50 % - 85 % we just ca n't afford to lose that kind of money when we decide to hang it up . A good rule of thumb is to get at least three bids on your savings and look them over good this is your retirement take it serious .
The answer to the question in most cases is yes . As we get older we get closer to death , it is a fact of life . When we die , someone will have to pay our final expenses and any debts we may incur . We may wish to provide for those we love and help relieve the burden of loss . Life insurance provides that and more .
There is no uniform health insurance system in Europe , each nation has it 's own system . On the whole , European nations have taken a more socialized approach to financing health care than we have in the United States -LRB- though ObamaCare is kind of changing that -RRB- . In Switzerland you are mandated to purchase private health insurance . In Britain they have the National Health Service that provides health insurance for the masses while at the same time having a growing private health insurance and health care delivery system for the people who can afford to operate outside of the national system -LRB- the class system remains alive and well in England and many European nations -RRB- . Some European systems give the illusion of being `` free '' but people are really paying for their care in the form of higher taxes and rationing of care along with price controls on healthcare providers . While there are things we Americans can learn from the European experience , the Europeans have hardly achieved perfection when it comes to health care and health insurance .
I 'll apologize first , but I have to disagree with Brandon . Auto insurance IS expensive in Michigan . As of 30 days ago , we have the second highest auto insurance rates in the country . This is kind of surprising if you compare the statutory coverage in Michigan . We have two things that drive up our costs . First we 're one of 26 no-fault states . Secondly , we 're the only state in the US that has unlimited lifetime personal injury protection . If you 're injured in a car accident in Michigan and you 're covered by an auto insurance policy , you 'll receive unlimited lifetime medical benefits as well as work loss benefits . I personally know people who have been injured in a car accident and been receiving medical care for over 25 years to the tune of over $ 5,000,000 . You 'd think we 'd have the highest rates in the country . Now , just because the average rates here are higher than some other states does n't mean YOU have to pay higher rates . There are many factors that determine the cost of your insurance and you can do things to help reduce your cost . Find a good agent and he/she will be able to tell you how to manage your rates .
Can everyone get health insurance ? Well , soon we will find out in 2014 . The quesiton will be can we afford it ? Prior to Obamacare , health insurance was the domain of states to set the rules for insurance . Some states have very good consumer oriented insurance laws and others really do n't . I live in a state where anybody who wants health insurance can get it , granted you still have to pay for it , but you can get coverage . My state actually adopted the Clinton Plan and fixed it to where it works and works well . Obamacare will have a lesser impact in my state than others , because we already were doing many of the things in Obamacare .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How To Submit A Renters Insurance Claim ?
To submit a claim for bodily injury , property damage or damage to personal property on your renters policy , contact either your agent or the direct number provided by your insurance company . Before you file the claim you should understand that the claim might trigger an increase in future premiums . If the damage is near the deductible you might pay less by not filing the claim . Discuss this with your agent if you have the time . If you are sued , notify the company immediately .
-- > Normal 0 In the spirit of every reasonable insurance question is deserving of an answer , I submit . Tenant Homeowner or Renters policies cover damage to your personal property and food certainly would be considered Personal Property . As long as the power outage was caused by one of the named perils in your policy -LRB- fire , lightning , wind , vehicle damage , etc. -RRB- and it occurred on your premises , you may have a valid claim for food spoiled as a result of a power outage . But if the power outage was caused by something that occurred away from your residence , most Renters policies specifically exclude that type of loss unless the power outage then causes covered damage to your residence . Remember however , most Renters policies have a deductible of $ 250 or more so make sure you take that into consideration . Add to that the effect submitting a small claim , one less than $ 1000 , could have on your future premium or the willingness of your insurance company to renew your coverage . It may be a good idea to pass on submitting this type of claim even though you may have some coverage . In addition , most policies require you to take reasonable steps to preserve your property following a loss . Make sure you have done what you can to prevent your food from spoiling following a power outage . Some policies include a number of additional coverages , often an effort to make one companys policy appear more attractive than another . These additional coverages provide nominal amounts of insurance covering specific loss situations such as key replacement or food spoilage . Here again , you may be tempted to submit a claim because you have coverage but consider the impact a claim might have on future premiums and renewal terms . You may be better served to simply replace the food . When an event like this occurs , try to recall why you purchased insurance in the first place . More than likely , it wasnt to reimburse you if the food in your refrigerator went bad .
If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a renter 's loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Renter 's '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you as the insured must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value.Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52 inch HD TV when it was actually an 18 inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed .
Medicare is operated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- , which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services in cooperation with the Social Security Administration , it does not have a central claim-paying office for incoming claims . Rather , large insurance companies , chosen within each state , actually administer the claim payment process . So , from state to state , claim submissions are submitted to different entities . For example , claimants living in New Jersey submit claims to the New Jersey Medicare Claim Office .
There is really only 1 renters policy . However , the coverage included can vary . Some policies are written on an Actual Cash Value basis , where other policies are written on a Full Content Replacement basis . Let me explain the difference . Let 's say you went out and bought a brand new TV that cost you $ 1000 today . Three years from now , it gets damaged and you submit a claim under your Renters policy . On the Actual Cash Value policy , the claim adjuster would look up the make and model of your TV , and find that it is no longer selling for $ 1000 . That model now sells for $ 400 . But the $ 400 would be for a brand now unit out of the box , where your TV was 3 years old , so they further reduce the claim based on depreciation . You 're left with $ 250 - and you still need to pay your $ 100 deductible . Not a good day . With Full Contents Replacement coverage , the claims adjuster looks at how much you spent on the TV , not the make and model , and your claim is processed for $ 1000 -LRB- minus your $ 100 deductible -RRB- . And since technology has improved over the past three years , you now have the choice to purchase the same TV you had -LRB- which is selling for only $ 400 now remember ? -RRB- or purchase a better TV with better features than the one that was damaged . Not a bad day at all ! Although the Actual Cash Value policy will cost less , you wind up getting less in the end . Remember , just because one policy is cheaper than another , does n't mean it 's a better deal . Always consult with a licensed , professional insurance agent to help determine which policy is best for your needs .
Eyeglasses are personal property and the Renters Policy pays for personal property damaged by covered perils so in that sense , yes , eyeglasses are covered by the Renters Policy . They would also be covered by a Homeowner Policy and a Condo Policy . However , all those policies come with a deductible . A deductible is money you pay toward a claim . The insurance company pays the excess . Say , for example , it costs $ 300 to replace glasses that were damaged by a covered peril , like a fire . If you had a $ 250 deductible , you would only recover $ 50 . I would suggest , you not submit the claim . Most insurance companies have a threshold of two claims in three years . After two claims in three years , your policy will not be renewed and because insurance companies share claim information , you will not get a competitive offer from any standard insurance company . You will end up paying much , much more money for the same coverage . My advice is to raise your deductible as high as you can tolerate and save your insurance for real disasters . Your question is important and I hope I 've answered it to your satisfaction . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Its no problem . I answer questions like this all the time . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
It ultimately depends on how long it takes for you to submit a claim form -LRB- and any other documents your carrier requires -RRB- and the carrier to review and process the paperwork . If everything is in good order when you submit the paperwork , the entire process should take maybe a couple of weeks . If the carrier requests additional paperwork -LRB- e.g. something needs to be clarified -RRB- or the forms you submitted were not completed properly , then it could take a little longer than that . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I suppose Medicare can accept paper claims but I am not aware of any providers that submit paper claims . All provider claims for several years have been submitted electronically . Any medical provider that treats a Medicare beneficiary is required to file claims with Medicare regardless of whether they accept assignment or not .
The funding source of paying disability claims depends on who is backing up the promise to do so . 1 . Social Security DI is funded by tax-payers 2 . State-sponsored DI -LRB- if available -RRB- is usually funded by employers within that state . -LRB- A sole-proprietor that constitutes a company of one person may be able to `` opt in '' to the program with special enrollment . -RRB- 3 . Individual - or corporate-owned DI is funded by an insurance company that collects premiums from the individual or corporation to form a `` pool '' of money from which claims are paid . In any of these cases , the funding source must have sufficient funds in the pool to pay out legitimate claims as they are submitted . Premiums reflect the justified cost of maintaining that fund at the proper level . Therefore , claims may require a company to submit an application to the State Department of Insurance for increasing premiumsfora specified `` block of business '' within which claims will - or already have - exceeded premiums coming in for that block . -LRB- An individual can not be singled out for premium increases . -RRB- If one owns a policy that is `` non-cancelable '' , that term means that the carrier can not increase premiums for any reason over the life of the policy .
How does a health insurance claim work ? Let 's follow a claim . First the billing is created in the doctor 's office where staff submits a claim for payment to an insurance company . This could be done anywhere from that day or later that month , depending on the office . I have known of providers who have sent collection notices before they 've even gotten around to billing . When the claim arrives at the insurance company it goes straight to the claims departement where the informaion is entered into the computers . Basically the claims person gets the bill , data entries the necessary information and hits enter . From that point on , most claims are untouched by human hands . The claim information goes into the computer where it is compared to the coverage the insured has . From that a payment and explaination of benefits page are created and sent on their ways . When I use the term untouched by human hands I mean not everything processed is checked to see if the parameters -LRB- plan design -RRB- are correct . Usually , only billings above a certain size are rechecked for accuracy . Years ago the threshold was 20,000 got a second look by a human for accuracy . Companies leave it up to the insured to find any small errors and call in for corrections . The cost of double checking every claim would be astronomical .
Let me differentiate between a liability claim and a property claim . If you are sued , notify the claims office of the insurance company immediately . Do not sign any papers and do not make any statements to agents of the individual or company suing you . Never hesitate to submit a liability claim . If your home is uninhabitable because of a covered loss such as fire or lightning call the insurance company claims office immediately . If you are the victim of a disaster , call the claims office immediately . Many insurance companies have mobile claims operations that are dispatched to help victims of disasters . Any damage to your home is a big deal . However , if the damage is not more than two times your deductible , and it pays to know your deductible , call your agent first . Property insurance policies have varying features that can either reduce the deductible or reduce the premium if your policy is claims free . Sometimes a little pencil work will show that it is better to forgo the claim as the reductions you receive for being claims free could be greater than the amount you would recover . If there is water damage and you can not reach your agent quickly enough contact the claims office because water damage only gets worse ! Often a quick responding water mitigation team can reduce and almost eliminate the loss .
Your homeowner 's insurance will pay for a new roof if the claim you submit is covered under the policy . For example , fire , heavy wind , tornado , and other weather-related claims are typically covered . However , the normal wear and tear of a roof is not a situation where you can submit for a claim .
Well , kind of . If you have established an account at mymedicare.gov you can review claims submitted and adjudicated by Medicare . If you have a Medigap plan , your mymedicare account will show if those claims have been submitted to your gap carrier or not . Medicare Advantage participants can review claims at their carrier site .
If your doctor accepts assignment Medicare pays them directly once the claim is submitted , adjudicated and approved . Fees are based on ICD-9 -LRB- diagnosis -RRB- and CPT-4 -LRB- treatment -RRB- coding for services rendered . Once the claim is approved Medicare submits the claim via crossover to your Medicare supplement plan carrier that is on record .
To submit a claim for bodily injury , property damage or damage to personal property on your renters policy , contact either your agent or the direct number provided by your insurance company . Before you file the claim you should understand that the claim might trigger an increase in future premiums . If the damage is near the deductible you might pay less by not filing the claim . Discuss this with your agent if you have the time . If you are sued , notify the company immediately .
Turn around from visit to payment is usually around 30 days or less . For most insurance carriers , their goal is payment within five days of receipt . Receipt is the big deal as some medical offices hold claims and submit in batches through the month . I have had experience with medical offices sending late notices or threats of collection without ever mailing the claim to be processed . For a claim to be paid , it first has to be submitted .
The answer to your question will vary somewhat depending upon where you are getting your health insurance . Are you a new employee anticipating your employer based coverage ? Or , are you a person looking for a personal , individual major medical insurance plan ? After January 1 , 2014 in the employer based setting and under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act , once you are hired as a full-time eligible employee or your hours are increased to full-time status , then the employer can not have a waiting period that exceeds 90 calendar days from the date you become eligible . So , an employer can have a waiting period of anywhere from `` date of hire '' to the 90 calendar days from date of hire . For administrative and payroll keeping purposes I am finding most employers are opting for a policy on a new hire becoming eligible for coverage on the `` first day of the month following 60-days '' . In the individual health insurance world we do have to keep the new open enrollment periods in mind and how failure to enroll during this annual election period can impact a person 's eligibility for health insurance coverage between open enrollment times . In other words , if you `` just did n't get around to it '' and you 've had no change of life status event since open enrollment closed then you ca n't take out a major medical health insurance policy until the next open enrollment period for a 1st of the year start date at best . -LRB- If you qualify you can take out a Short Term Medical policy to carry you through until then -RRB- Assuming yours is a normal individual major medical enrollment then the following rules of thumb apply to when your effective date of coverage is supposed to be ; 1 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted on or before the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the next month . For example , an enrollment submitted on December 10th would be for an effective date of January 1st . 2 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted after the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the following month . For example , an application is submitted on December 20th would be for an effective date of February 1st . Open enrollment season for 2015 begins on November 15th , 2014 and runs through February 15th , 2015 .
Immediately ! Call your agent or insurer and get started on that process . Claims can take a while to resolve or they can be resolved quickly . If you have a police report or evidence ready to go as soon as you file your claim , it can often get fixed faster . That said , you can usually submit your evidence after the initial filing . I 'm not aware of any company that wo n't let you submit evidence after filing your claim but there are a lot of companies out there . Long-short of it , file as soon as possible .
My father passed away this February and my mom got the benefits from his policies a few weeks after submitting the death claims . Getting the certified death certificate to submit with the death claim actually took about as long as getting the life insurance payments did . One of these policies was taken out in 1945 . Life insurance is an amazing thing .
To answer this question , I will assume that it is posed to determine if a homeowner policy will cover any type of damage to an air conditioner , absent any other facts . The homeowner policy is definitely not a maintenance policy and therefore will not pay for damage to the unit , unless it is damaged by the occurrence of some other type of covered peril . For example , if it is a relatively expensive ` window unit ' and a heavy picture falls off of the wall , striking and severely damaging the ac unit , there could be coverage , subject to the application of the homeowner policy deductible . In reality , you should think twice about the future premium increase ramifications of submitting a smallish claim of this nature . You would , in a situation of this nature , check with your agent to make sure it is worth submitting . If it is a central ac unit and is damaged by a fire in the garage caused by a carelessly laid cigar , there would be coverage , again subject to the deductible . The financial loss for a central ac unit would no doubt be much more extensive that for a window unit and might therefore merit claim submission . Also , the fire described would probably have damaged the walls , ceiling , possibly stored objects , etc. , and produced smoke damage to other parts of a house , if attached , justifying submission of a broader claim for damages , including those to the ac unit .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Offers The Best Life Insurance Plan ?
The life insurance company that offers the best life insurance plan is the one that has the best price for the exact coverage you need from your unique situation . Here is the problem all policies are completely different and the insurance company has a different risk tolerance and marketing budget to have a one size fits all price . I recommend using an experienced independent broker to professionally shop for the best product at the best price to meet your goals and needs .
Of course , the best policy is the one you can afford . But , in my opinion , the best product is an Indexed Universal Life Policy , through National Life Group , and brokered through Premier Financial Alliance . Why ? Because that policy offers Living Benefits , including chronic illness , chronic care , and more , all at a cost the same or less than most companies offer their simple life insurance policy with payment by those folks only at death , while National Life will pay you while you are alive ! Talk with an agent enrolled to sell these exclusive products . GARY LANE . Thank you .
There is no one company that offers the best life insurance plan . Insurance companies usually have a niche where they have better prices , or are more risk tolerant , or offer more features , or have better returns than another company . Finding the company that has what you need makes it the best plan for you .
The key is to contact a recommended life insurance agent . Friends , colleagues , and neighbors will be happy to give you a recommendation . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the company . The agent is trained to match your needs to your budget .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plan F is the most popular and most comprehensive of the 10 supplement plans , but also features the highest premiums . If budget is not a major concern , I would recommend going with this plan as it offers the most predictable healthcare expense structure - just about everything in hospital and doctor office visits , tests , and exams are covered at 100 % . Plan N can be a great option as well , especially if your doctors accept assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- thus not subjecting you to any excess charges -LRB- which plans F and G cover -RRB- . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans in total and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . In short , each plan has it 's own pros and cons and what may be suitable for you may not be for someone else . Independent agent can provide you with the rates for multiple companies and help get you set up with the plan that 's right for you . Carriers try to differentiate themselves by competing on rates and what , if any , value-added services they offer . Value-added services can be things like a help line , discounts for services -LRB- such as dental and vision - not dental and vision insurance , just discounts off the full price -RRB- , and others . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' whole life rates . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . There are a number of factors that go into the calculation of rates for a policy , but that 's only one area to think about . Some carriers may offer participating whole life policies -LRB- paying dividends that can be used to buy paid-up additions , reduce the premiums , or pay cash to the policyowner -RRB- - other whole life policies may be non-participating -LRB- meaning they do not pay any dividends -RRB- . Another factor determining which program will be best for your needs is the risk class . People may qualify for different risk classes with each carrier because each person has a different medical history and each carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines -LRB- some carriers may be more aggressive in their underwriting and others may be more conservative -RRB- . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies to see who will offer you the lowest rates for what program you 're looking to set up .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
You first want to research the types of benefits available under a Medigap plan , decide which of these benefits you want , and then select the Medigap policy that meets these needs . All of the Medigap plans are standardized so the benefits under a given plan is the EXACT same from every carrier . So how do they differentiate themselves in that type of marketplace ? They feature different rates , rating methods - community rated , issue age rated , and attained age rated , and value added services -LRB- e.g. UHC plan members can get discounts for vision or dental services and access to the senior sneakers program through AARP -RRB- . A lot of people think `` Why do n't I just get a plan F ? All of the benefits available are included in that plan ! '' While this is true , this plan is also going to be the most expensive . If you 're on a fixed income , you may want to try to keep your cost down . Therefore , a different plan may be more appropriate for you . For example , a plan G offers all of the same benefits as a plan F , except for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 for 2014 -RRB- . However , a plan G is going to be cheaper than a plan F -LRB- and usually by a good margin -RRB- . Plan N can also reduce premiums by a substantial margin and offer great coverage as well - the difference from plans F & G being a small copay is due when you go to the doctor -LRB- up to a $ 20 copay -RRB- or the hospital -LRB- up to a $ 50 copay -RRB- and excess charges are not covered . Plan N is most useful for someone who 's doctors accept Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- when accepting assignment , a doctor accepts the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full and can not bill you an excess charge -RRB- . Another major point to keep in mind is where your health is now and where it may be in the future because you might not be able to switch to another Medigap plan later if your health drastically changed down the line , you may not be able to qualify for a new plan if medical underwriting is required . The rating method a carrier uses is an important factor to consider here . You also need to find out which carriers offer the plan in your area . Remember to keep in mind that not every carrier offers every plan . Because there are many health care plan options available to seniors , it 's most helpful for you to work with an experienced broker who can guide you through all of these steps . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
There 's many of them . A lot of insurance companies have at least an `` A '' ranking or better from A.M. Best . Some of the big name companies that people have heard of are MetLife , American General , Prudential , Guardian , Principal , Genworth , etc. . When buying life insurance , there 's no one company that offers the `` best '' life insurance . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else.This is because people may qualify for different risk classes , they may be looking to secure a different amount of coverage , keep the coverage for a different length of time -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- , or may live in a different state -LRB- not every product from every carrier is available in every state -RRB- . All of these factors go into the calculation of rates . If you 're looking to buy life insurance , you should consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can review your specific needs and budget and shop the case for you to compare multiple companies to see who will offer you the lowest rates.I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There 's many of them . Ideally , you want to look at companies that have an `` A '' ranking or better from rating companies like A.M. Best or Moody 's . Some of the big name companies that people have heard of are MetLife , American General , Prudential , Guardian , Principal , Genworth , just to name a few . When buying life insurance , there 's no one company that offers the `` best '' life insurance . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . This is because people may qualify for different risk classes , they may be looking to secure a different amount of coverage , keep the coverage for a different length of time -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- , or may live in a different state -LRB- not every product from every carrier is available in every state -RRB- . All of these factors go into the calculation of rates . If you 're looking to buy life insurance , you should consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can review your specific needs and budget and shop the case for you to compare multiple companies to see who will offer you the lowest rates . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Unfortunately there 's no one company that offers the `` best '' term life insurance . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . There are 4 main factors that determine the rates for your life insurance policy - your age , risk classification , amount of coverage , and how long it 's guaranteed for . Your risk classification is the MOST important factor when looking for coverage . Some companies may offer you a better risk class than others because they each have their own underwriting guidelines and respond to specific medical histories differently . It is ALWAYS best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can compare multiple companies and shop the case for you and help determine the most likely risk classification you will qualify for with each company based on your medical history so you can figure out which company will offer you the desired coverage at the lowest rates - in short , which company will be your best starting point . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' term life insurance . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . This is because people may qualify for different risk classes , they may be looking to secure a different amount of coverage , keep the coverage for a different length of time , or may live in a different state -LRB- not every product from every carrier is available in every state -RRB- . All of these factors go into the calculation of rates . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies to see who will offer you the lowest rates for what program you 're looking to set up .
There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' term life insurance . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . This is because people may qualify for different risk classes , they may be looking to secure a different amount of coverage , keep the coverage for a different length of time -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- , or may live in a different state -LRB- not every product from every carrier is available in every state -RRB- . All of these factors go into the calculation of rates . You should consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop the case for you and compare multiple companies to see who will offer you the lowest rates for what program you 're looking to set up . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Is My Car Insurance Claim Being Investigated ?
Hard to answer such a question without any details . But in general , I would n't worry too much about it . Fraud is so out of control , that they have to investigate certain claims . During the claims process , companies have their set of `` red flags '' that triggers further investigation . As long as you have nothing to hide , you should n't worry about it too much . They may ask for things such as : - bank statements - proof of residency - receipt from last oil change - etc. , etc. , etc. . Sometimes innocent minor things can trigger a red flag , and it ends up being no big deal . Other times , fraud is suspected . And sometimes , a high dollar amount of loss can trigger an investigation simply for due diligence . So do n't sweat it . If you have nothing to hide , give them what they want and you should be fine .
A renters claim needs information . As soon as the information can be assembled , settling the claim is quite quick . The company does have a right to investigate . In a recent claim the customer claimed the loss of photographic equipment from his car . The amount of equipment claimed couldnt have been crammed into the car . In addition , he advertised himself as a professional photographer . Business equipment isnt covered . However , the process of investigation is not lengthy and the adjuster is trying to get the claim closed as quickly as possible .
Life insurance claims can be denied but it is very rare for a life insurance company to not pay the death benefit proceeds if the life insured has died and proof of death has been submitted . If death was by suicide or a material misrepresentation in the first two policy years of the policy , the claim will be investigated . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in very limited circumstances of fraud .
I assume you are referring to a claim investigation . This can verywidely The goal of the insurance carrier is toinvestigateand come to a determination as quickly as possible but here are factors that can slow down the process . Getting a police report . Police reports can take 10 and up to 30 days to obtain . There really is no way to speed this up as the insurance carrier is at the mercy of the policy department . Contacting the other party for a statement . Many times the other party involved in the claim can be unresponsive further slowing down the process . Were there witnesses who need to be interviewed . These are again details that can slow the process down . There are simple claims that canresolvedquickly with out all these other steps but for the more complicated claims , He said She said , further investigation takes place and you can be looking at 60 days in some cases . All this is merely for determining fault . Keep in mind if you havecollisioncoverage on your vehicle a claim investigation will not hinder getting your carrepaired . You just have to meet your deductible . This is always good to talk to your local agent about this process as the agent can better handle explaining the process then the claims adjusters .
The other respondents explain that two basic triggers exist within common liability coverage policies . It is important to realize that most personal insurance - auto , home , motorcycle , rv - are based upon the occurrence trigger in the insurance policy . An occurrence is an event including repeated exposures to the same condition , that cause loss covered by the policy . You 'll understand that if the loss `` occurs '' during the policy period , the loss is coverable and a duty to defend exists until such time as it is determined after further investigation that coverage is not provided by the policy . At that time the carrier would probably extend a `` reservation of rights '' letter to you to notify you that the investigation of the loss events are revealing to the carrier that the loss is not covered for some reason contained within the policy or due to the events that occurred . Nevertheless , if the loss `` occurs '' during the period the policy was effective , and barring exclusions and limitations , their is coverage in an occurrence policy . A `` claims made '' policy changes what triggers the benefits of the policy . In the case of claims made coverage , generally only written on business and professional liability exposures , the trigger is the event and when it occurred . What is different now is that the claims must be first made during the period of coverage or a subsequent policy . If a claim is permitted to be made on subsequent policies , the chain of coverage needs to be uninterrupted and the `` retroactive '' date for coverage to be set to a point before the actual date of the loss . Claims Made policies were designed to help eliminate the chance that years and years of coverage on an occurrence policy could not be stacked one upon the other to generate large amounts of coverage . In the case of claims made policies , only the current policy limit is exposed to loss and not a stack of limits from policies covering prior annual periods . One other point that is necessary to understand . Generally , there are limitations on how long after a policy is cancelled for a claim to be presented . Occurrence policies are much more accommodating here . On the other hand , claims made policies have a limited period of time after the policy ends for a claim to be made . This is referred to as extended discovery and extended discovery on otherwise unendorsed policies is only 60 days . That is , you only have sixty days to present a claim for coverage at the end of a claims made policy . Additional extended periods of discovery are available at additional cost but each carrier may have different periods of discovery available . This feature on a claims made policy provides the `` tail '' of coverage that an occurrence policy includes without additional charge . A `` tail '' is the time beyond the period of coverage where a claim may be first reported or appear on the books of the carrier . Liability type losses can have a long `` tail '' due to the nature of the coverage and potential loss . Property losses , on the other hand , generally have short `` tails '' where the loss is not known . The reserve that the carrier must maintain within its accounting for these losses is not as the IBNR -LRB- incurred but not reported -RRB- loss reserve . Over time the carrier reduces this reserve in recognition that the further past the end of a policy that they travel , the less likely a loss has occurred or will be reported . This should help you understand just how much must taken into account to answer your generalized question . I hope this helps answer your question .
A deductible is one of the ways your insurance carrier helps to keep insurance affordable . There are three basic ways your financial participation in insurance can work . First , you agree to pay premium for a policy . Second , in most policies , you agree to pay the first dollars of a property loss and that is what we call the `` deductible '' . -LRB- Do n't confuse a deductible with a co-payment agreement . -RRB- You also agree , whether you know it or not , to be responsible for every dollar of loss above and beyond the limits and amounts of insurance you purchased . These three are the ways you agree to pay for the losses you suffer . Most of us only encounter the deductible and premium payments as typical methods of paying for our losses . A deductible helps the carrier avoid the expense of investigating , processing , and paying small claims . A small claims , say under $ 500 , may cost as much to investigate , process and pay with a check or draft as the cost of the actual loss has cost the carrier . A deductible is a way for your insurance to cost less and a way for you to afford the cost of insurance . It is also a way for the carrier to avoid the costly process of paying small losses . When the cost of the repair or replacement of the property is determined , your deductible is subtracted from the final payment and you become responsible to contribute this amount to obtain the repair or replacement of your lost property . Deductibles are rather straightforward and I hope that the latter helps you understand the way a deductible works and why it is included as a part of your property insurance policy .
The insurance company first investigates to determine the coverage they have on the vehicle . Then they determine responsibility in the case of a crash . Then they determine the extent of damage . Because the adjuster handles numerous claims they can spot a claim that requires additional investigation . If fraud is suspected the investigation takes a much deeper look into the circumstances of the crash .
Great question ! A better one would be why would you want to risk living in one ? In almost every case , if an insurance company finds that there were laws being broken in the event that causes the claim to be filed , they will delay , or deny the claim pending an investigation of the circumstances . If it turns out you were living at great risk for a claim in an apartment that you should n't legally have been in , I 'd expect them to be slow to pay , and quick to deny . Please rethink your idea of living there , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Hard to answer such a question without any details . But in general , I would n't worry too much about it . Fraud is so out of control , that they have to investigate certain claims . During the claims process , companies have their set of `` red flags '' that triggers further investigation . As long as you have nothing to hide , you should n't worry about it too much . They may ask for things such as : - bank statements - proof of residency - receipt from last oil change - etc. , etc. , etc. . Sometimes innocent minor things can trigger a red flag , and it ends up being no big deal . Other times , fraud is suspected . And sometimes , a high dollar amount of loss can trigger an investigation simply for due diligence . So do n't sweat it . If you have nothing to hide , give them what they want and you should be fine .
Yes , life insurance in force at the death of the life insured pays out the death benefit proceeds once proof of death has been submitted . The life insurer can not deny a claim unless due to either suicide in the first two policy years or a material misrepresentation in the first two years of the policy . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . Life insurance is something you need to qualify for in advance - the insured must be insurable , the owner must have an insurable interest , etc. . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in cases of fraud .
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
A contested life insurance policy can take months to investigate . As you may imagine when dealing with a large amount of money , life insurance death proceeds , the insurance carrier will be sure that they have conducted a thorough investigation . That being said , there is no set time period when a death claim is contested . Every situation is different and unique . A good experienced agent can be a great asset to move these investigations along , but they can and will take a lot of time . Best of luck !
It is very rare for a life insurance company to not pay the death benefit proceeds if the life insured has died and proof of death has been submitted . Basically it comes down to either suicide or a material misrepresentation in the first two policy years of the policy . If a life insurance company does not pay a death claim in these situations at the conclusion of their investigation , they would return premiums paid with interest . Life insurance is something you need to qualify for in advance - the insured must be insurable , the owner must have an insurable interest , etc. . For a life insurance claim to be denied , after an investigation , the insurance company would have to contest it within the first two policy years on the basis of a material misrepresentation made during the application process or the insured would have to have committed suicide within the first two policy years . An insurance company may not normally contest a claim after the first two years of a policy except in cases of fraud .
When you purchase your Homeowners ' Insurance , read it over carefully and discuss the terms and conditions of your contract with your Insurance Professional . That way you have a better understanding of what is covered and what is not . If the contract indicates that there sould be coverage for your loss , and your company denies the claim , you can certainly discuss the situation and get a clearer understanding as to why . If you feel their decision is in error , you can always file a report with the state Insurance Department who will investigate the claim and disposition on your behalf .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does life insurance cover drug overdose ? Remember , during the contestability of a contract during the first two years , if somebody actually overdosed on drugs and that can be quantified as suicide , most carriers will not pay the death claim . If this is an accidental drug overdose , whether by prescription or whether by street drugs , then if it 's just a normal death claim , it should pay the claim . But keep in mind , this is going to be highly investigated during the first two years . So if death occurs and drug overdose is involved , you 're going to go through an investigation process to determine under their due diligence process whether this was suicide or not . So just keep in mind when you 're looking at a question like this you 're saying , When did it occur and under what circumstances did it occur ?
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
Life insurance can be claimed by the beneficiary of the policy . The procedure is to present a claim form and proof of death to the life insurance company . If the policy is over 2 years old or it has been over 2 years since last reinstatement that is usually all that is needed . If the policy is less that 2 years there maybe an investigation period before the claim is paid . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
I have 2 tips when it comes to purchasing renters insurnace : Look at getting replacement value vs. current value coverage . If you only have the current value , you are only getting money for the your TV , etc. is valued at today , not the replacement value which is what it cost to purchase a new one , replacing the one you lost . Shop around with different companies . Look for financial status and claims paying ability of the insurance company . I prefer to work with companies that are rated on AM Best at A - or better . If a company has a lower rating , investigate why before you decide to move forward with them .
You are required to notify your insurance company of a claim in a timely manner . It is a good rule of thumb to pick up the phone sometime the same day of the incident , if possible , and notify your agent . Most companies have a dedicated claims `` hotline '' that you can call . Often it is printed on your insurance ID card which you should have in your glove box in the car . If you have an accident , first be sure to check the condition of everyone in your car as well as the other then contact the police and , if necessary , Emergency Medical Services . If you have a camera or a phone with that capability , photograph the scene . Be sure not to sign any written statements at the accident scene . The investigating police officer will often prepare a preliminary reportand provide you with a copy . The formal report will be available to you and your insurance adjuster usually within a few days . Finally , if your car is going to be towed remember to remove all of your personal belongings .
A claim could potentially take as little as hours and depending on the circumstances much longer . Most carriers try to settle claims as quickly as possible normally within days . If you have extenuating circumstances involved with the claim then it could be stalled during the investigation of the situation that caused the claim . Contact your local agent and they can help you determine the documents and other information that can help you expedite a claim when the need arises .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Get Health Insurance When Pregnant ?
You may be able to get coverage through Medicaid . There are no open enrollment period restrictions for this program . However there are needs based criteria which are often extended for pregnant women . Each state has very different rules for who qualifies . Contact the Medicaid office in your county to see if you qualify .
Under the new Affordable Care Act , you can not be declined for health insurance for any medical-related conditions . Each policy is required to cover 10 essential health benefits - one of these essential benefits is maternity care . You can apply for a health insurance plan during the annual enrollment period - you can only secure coverage outside of this window if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Giving birth to a baby would be a qualifying event . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker to help you determine which carrier and which health plan will best serve your needs and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
All health insurance plans now cover maternity . They handle maternity just like any other claim . So how much it would cost you depends on the plan you get ... . What is the deductible ? What is the out-of-pocket maximum ? If you 're buying a plan specifically because you see childbirth down the road , consider 2 things : If you 're pregnant now , you ca n't get insurance because you 've obviously got a pre-existing condition . If you 're not pregnant now , and you 're buying a new plan , then you 'll have to replacethe planby January anywaydue tohealthcare reform . So if you want health insurance now , there 's really no reason to factor childbirth into the equasion because you 'll be changing plans -LRB- due to healthcare reform -RRB- before you deliver .
You can switch health insurance pans while pregnant , but make sure to do your due diligence first . If you are increasing benefits and lowering maternity out-of-pocket costs then switching would be a great idea . On the other side of that argument , if you 're happy with your current plan and benefits you may find staying where you are until the baby is born serves you better . In the new arena of health reform and individual health insurance you can only switch during open enrollment or if you qualify for a special enrollment due to a life changing event . It 's best -LRB- pregnant or not -RRB- to find the right program and stick with it throughout the year to avoid headaches . For more information on how maternity is covered under Obamacare plans please visit www.clminsure.com
Can you get disability insurance if you are already pregnant ? Yes , but not for the pregnancy . It is possible to get disability insurance while pregnant , but disability insurance plans use a pre-existing condition clause in the policy to prevent a person from going on immediate claim when they purchase the policy .
Yes , there are some companies that require medical underwriting that will allow a pregnant woman to apply in her first two trimesters . There are some No Exam companies that will allow a woman to apply while pregnant in any trimester . You must be within the policy 's weight guidelines and not be experiencing complications due to pregnancy in order to obtain a policy while pregnant , unless the policy has very few health questions -LRB- simplified or guaranteed issue -RRB- , in which case those things might not matter .
Yes you can get health insurance when pregnant , but there are limitations . There are three places to turn . You can enroll in a group health plan through your employer . HIPPA prevents group plans from excluding pregnancy as a pre-existing condition even if you had no prior coverage . You would enroll during your open enrollment . You can opt into an Affordable Care Act plan in your state marketplace during open enrollment . The policy would take effect on January 1 . Any pregnancy related medical expenses would be immediately covered . Medicaid provides immediate coverage for pregnant women who meet income guidelines . There are no open enrollment limitations for Medicaid .
Yes , unfortunately , pregnancy is a pre-existing condition for disability insurance if you apply while pregnant . If you applied before becoming pregnant , obviously , then the pregnancy would not be a pre-existing condition . However , some polices may require that you apply several months before you become pregnant in order to qualify .
You can purchase individual life insurance while pregnant . Most companies will not have a problem with the first two trimesters underwriting an individual who is pregnant and at that point experiencing a normal pregnancy without complications . The third trimester is a bit more dicey as most carriers at that point may wish to wait until after childbirth to underwrite . I have written and had issued life insurance for people up to the 7th month without any extra premium or restrictions by the insurance company . It is going to depend on the health of the person and how the pregnancy is going .
Can you get disability insurance while pregnant ? Yes , you can . Will they cover the pregnancy and any complications with ? NOPE . Disability policies carry a pre-existing condition clause that allows them to turn down a claim for a condition that occurs prior to the application . So you could get a disability policy while pregnant , but everything connected to the pregnancy would not be covered .
You can not get a short term disability policy that will pay for time off for a normal pregnancy and delivery , once you are already pregnant . If you got the short term disability insurance policy before becoming pregnant , they can receive benefits from that policy when you delivery your baby .
If your daughter had health insurance at least a year before she got pregnant them yes , it will be covered . Read the fine print on the policy.If she tries to get insurance after discovering she was pregnant , then it is considered a pre-existing condition and she wo n't be covered unless there is a complication during labor .
Every insurance carrier will ask medical questions when completing an application.Some carriers will decline applications for pregnant women.Many willnot ask any pregnancy related questions , so you may be able to purchase a policy while pregnant in many cases . Every policy will exclude coverage for any preexisting medical condition . That exclusion may last 6 to 12 months . That means your existing pregnancy will not be covered , but accidents and illnesses unrelated to your pregnancy may be covered . Policies covering normal childbirth are difficult to find . They are only offered through employers . If you have the opportunity to buy a policy it may be your only chance to get covered for future pregnancies .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
No , pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition , and you can not get maternity disability insurance while pregnant . There may be an exception somewhere , but it is highly doubtful . Even most group plans require that you have worked at the business before becoming pregnant in order to use disability benefits for normal pregnancy .
Yes , my pregnant daughter was just rated Preferred Plus , proof that if you are in good health and your weight fits the guideline , any rating is possible . However , some companies do restrict purchasing life insurance during the third trimester , so be sure you are applying with a company that allows it before applying for life insurance while pregnant .
If you were to purchase a short term disability policy while being four months pregnant , there will almost certainly be an exclusion on your policy that will exclude payment if time is taken off for any reason related to pregnancy or childbirth . If you had long term disability in place when you got pregnant , it should pay for bed rest due to complications during your 8th month of pregnancy . Congratulations and best wishes .
I am not aware of any carrier that will issue a life insurance policy to a pregnant female . There are many risk factors to consider which make it impossible to properly price the risk of a life insurance policy on a woman that is pregnant . Every carrier I am aware of will not consider an application until the pregnancy has ended and the woman has been released from her doctor 's care .
Since disability insurance pays for time off for pregnancy and childbirth , being pregnant is considered a pre-existing condition and you can not usually apply for disability insurance while pregnant . In my experience , the application is postponed until after the baby is born , but you might be able to modify the policy to exclude pregnancy related disability so that you can go forward with the application .
Historically pregnant women could not obtain health insurance when individual health insurance was medically underwritten . Although Obamacare , as it is commonly known as , has many issues and problems , individuals can now obtain guarantee issue health insurance without any issues about pregnancy or pre-existing conditions . During open enrollment which begins again in November 2014 for January 2015 effective dates everyone that wants to apply for health insurance will be approved . If you have a qualifying life event under the IRS code you will be able to purchase health insurance within 60 days of the qualifying event .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can A Corporation Pay For Disability Insurance ?
The business can pay for short or long term disability insurance in a employer sponsored group plan . But some corporations do n't carry long term disability in their group plans , so they offer long term disability to their key executives as an extra retention benefit . They may be able to deduct the premiums , however if they do the benefits may be taxable .
Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is life insurance that a corporation takes out on the lives of one or more employees , with the benefits payable to the corporation or the employee 's families . COLI can be structured to fund certain types of nonqualified plans , such as split-dollar life insurance that allows the company to recoup its premium with part of the death benefit and the rest of the death benefit going to the employees ' beneficiaries . Many corporations these days use COLI to insure key employees , with the corporation receiving the death benefit so they can find and hire a new employee , or as part of a buy-sell agreement so they can buy a partner 's share . of stock .
Corporations can buy annuities as long as the issuing company allows that particular annuity product to be owned by a corporation . However , a corporate owned annuity is not tax deferred . At one time it was , but the IRS changed this rule . Corporations use annuities to fund corporate benefit plans , and to just accumulate assets for the future .
Disability Insurance will qualify for a business expense if the business pays for the policy and does not receive any of the benefit received . However the employee of the business will need to report any disability income benefits received as taxable income . The same holds true if a professional such as a physician or dentist is incorporated and has a salary or wage continuation plan in the corporate minutes . The corporation may pay for the policy but any benefits received are taxable as income . How premiums for coverage can be changed from year to year . For individual disability policies , in the event of a claim , whether benefits are taxed or not depends on how the premiums were paid during the year of claim . For group disability polices there is a three year look back for premiums . Overhead/practice expense disability policies are always tax deductible and benefits received by the business/practice are not taxable .
A corporation operates as a person and as such can buy life insurance . They can only buy life insurance on someone with whom they have an insurable interest . They can not select someone at random , purchase insurance on them and then hope that they die soon . A corporation would suffer a loss if a key person were to die prematurely . The corporation may have other obligations such as buying back the shares of a deceased shareholder . There are many reasons that a corporation can and should purchase life insurance .
A sole proprietor or partner can not deduct the premiums for life insurance on the owner or partner . You shouldnt want to deduct the premiums . You want to receive death benefits income tax free . If your business is a corporation , the corporation can deduct the premiums just the same way they can deduct any payment made to you as either salary or benefits , but the corporation can not have any ownership rights . You would then pay personal income tax on the premiums paid by the corporation .
You may already understand this but for our readers who may not , when we think about McDonald 's or some similar organization , we are really thinking about two distinct & separate entities that we put together in our minds . There is the big corporate McDonalds , which does n't really sell hamburgers , they sell franchises to sell hamburgers . Then there is your local McDonald 's restaurant , which is usually a locally or regionally owned franchise . Corporate McDonalds is a major corporation and provides the kinds of employee benefits one would expect in a Fortune 500 environment . That is totally separate and distinct from your local franchise owner who may own just a few McDonalds locations and is a small business person . This is the public face you see but associate with the corporate marketing imprint from decades of market presence and lots of advertising . Benefit decisions are an individual franchise owner 's issue not so much for the corporate McDonalds -LRB- though they do provide some guidance and access -RRB- to be involved with . This is a question you need to ask at the local employer level . Employee benefits in the fast food industry are the exception rather than the rule for reasons such as the income levels of the employees , lots of part-time employees , high turnover and relatively slim profit margins for many franchise owners , especially in the early years of their businesses .
In Canada , in most cases , life insurance premiums are not deductible . There are a couple of exceptions : 1 . If the insured is applying for a loan and the institution lending the funds requests that he or she buy life insurance as collateral , a portion of the premiums on that policy qualify as a deductible expense -LRB- the Net Cost of Pure Insurance -RRB- 2 . Where a donor donates a life insurance policy to a charity or a charity takes out a policy on the donors life , the premiums paid by the donor will be considered a charitable donation eligible for a charitable tax credit -LRB- for individuals -RRB- or deduction -LRB- for corporations -RRB- . Even though it is not deductible there are several situations where corporate owned life insurance should be considered . For example : The insurance is required to fund a buy-sell agreement , there will be more than one insured shareholder . There will probably be different ages and unequal premium rates . There may also be cost differences among shareholders due to underwriting premium ratings . Corporate-owned policies help to equalize the resulting premium differences . The taxpayer with the lowest tax rate requires less pre-tax income to pay the premiums ; their dollars are cheaper . In many cases that could be the corporation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . -LRB- Since tax laws vary by jurisdiction and do change , check with your local tax and professional advisors . -RRB- Note : The information contained in this article is intended to provide general guidelines only . The application and impact of the law can vary widely from case to case based on the specific or unique facts involved . Accordingly , the information in this article is not intended to serve as legal , accounting or tax advice . Users are encouraged to consult with their professional advisers for advice concerning specific matters before making a decision .
Broad questions deserve broad answers and so the question as to taxation of life insurance benefits is this : Generally , life insurance benefits are paid free of income taxation when paid to individuals . But , there are exceptions and possible complications to this simple answer . One big potential problem is when the decedent is also the policy owner and the life insurance gets added to the value of an estate and then taxed in that way . The IRS looks for incidents of ownership up three years prior to the death . Also , life insurance paid to an estate that is subject to other forms of taxation may result in the life benefits being taxed as well so it is n't always a good idea to pay life benefits to an estate . Also , life insurance after the first $ 50,000 is taxed when premium was paid by the employer . Life insurance you buy separately under group options are generally not taxed as income -LRB- provided all the rules are followed - see above -RRB- . Also , generally when a corporation pays the premium and the benefits are payable to the corporation , they ca n't write off the premium and collect the benefit free of income taxation . Under current law life insurance proceeds are only excludable up to the amounts of premium paid by the corpo in following with laws placed on the books in 2006 . There is a whole host of rules that must be followed to avoid taxation but it is possible that life insurance can be paid to a corporation and avoid taxation . While most of us will not be subject to taxation on the life insurance benefit it pays to understand how these benefits become taxable . Then , it is reasonably easy to avoid these pitfalls . Do n't also overlook the advice of a good agent and avoid the use of life insurance trusts to make sure the money moves to the beneficiary without taxation to the largest extent possible .
This appears to be a simple question ; however , publicly traded corporations have found that by purchasing key person policies on senior executives they can provide lavish payouts when that executive leaves the firm . The idea is simple ; the corporation has an insurable interest in the life of the executive . There are costs of securing a replacement and it the loss of a key employee can affect the companys ability to borrow money . All these factors and many others make these senior executives very valuable . The corporation can insure them to make up the financial impact that their unexpected death would make . By using cash value life insurance they can also accumulate a large amount of cash which will ease the transition when the executive leaves .
First off , make sure you ALWAYS consult your financial advisor or CPA for the tax laws regarding insurance premium payments . The average person can not deduct disability insurance premiums . However , business owners with a corporation can pay premiums through their corporation . But at the end of the year , they would need to claim the premiums paid as income .
This is a very interesting question , because on the surface , it appears as though the original poster is not very clear on the actual business entity . I can only assume that he is referring to a C-corporation . If that is the case , then I would absolutely agree with Mr. Savant 's eloquent response . However , if the corporation is an LLC or an S-Corporation , then please know that the premiums on a shareholder are not deductible .
If your car is registered in a business name you would need a business auto policy to properly insure and protect both your auto and your business . Insurance must be in the same name as registered . I see many people set up corporations and register their auto in the corporation and then try to insurance there vehicle on their personal policy . Why have a corporation at all if you want to be sued personally in the event of an accident . All you serve to do is rip down any wall of protection you were tying to build .
If you 're just an average Joe getting disability insurance , you can not deduct your premiums . if you 're a business owner with a corporation , you can pay the premiums through your corporation . At the end of the year , you must claim those premiums paid as income . It 's best to consult your financial advisor and/or CPA for the tax laws .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Most Americans have some form of disability protection through Social Security disability benefits . Many corporate employees have some form of short term disability group insurance . Some have key person disability insurance at work . But only a few have individual disability insurance policies , some online numbers say less than 2 % .
Disability insurance you purchase without the financial contribution of your employer towards the premium expense of individual disability insurance will generally be free of income taxation . This tax treatment results from the circumstances . First , the money used to pay premiums are `` after-tax '' dollars . In other words , you already paid tax on the money used to pay the disability premiums when it was earned as income . Second , neither an employer or business will take a deduction on their tax returns for the payments made to provide the insurance to you . These two things make the income earned under a personal , individual disability policy free of income tax on the benefits . As a general rule , if a business pays for the a portion of the premium the benefit is probably taxable to some extent even when you contribute . The amount of the benefit that is taxable will be determined by the ratio of the total premium paid , compared against the premium amounts paid by the business and the individual . If the benefit is payable to a business the income is probably taxable . Corporate -LRB- or business -RRB- owned disability insurance can be designed to provide income or overhead expense protection . Overhead expense protection permits the deduction of cost on tax forms but the income is taxable . There is also the possibility that disability income coverage is used in a buy-sell agreement . When the benefit is paid to a business , as a general rule , the benefit is taxable . As in most instances , this general answer can not begin to address the variety of complicating circumstances so specific answers are best for specific situations .
For the W2 employees and perhaps for dedicated 1099 contractors of an S Corporation the employer paying for or towards these employee 's coverage is quite straight forward . From a tax and accounting perspective its gets more complicated for persons who are more than 2 % eligible shareholders in the company . The bottom line is that company paid insurance premiums for more than a 2 % shareholder must be treated as wages to that owner/shareholder . So , the only way the S-Corp can deduct the amount it pays towards owner health insurance as a business expense is by including it as part of the shareholder 's salary . Owner -LRB- s -RRB- health insurance costs can no longer be declared as an insurance expense or employee benefit expense on the S-Corp 's taxes . The effect on the S-Corp 's net income is the same , but this does result in an increase in net taxable income for the owner -LRB- s -RRB- / shareholder -LRB- s -RRB- . It is possible that the owner/shareholder will recapture some of this by deducting it from their Adjusted Gross Income on their Form 1040 . However , the situation can be further complicated by various state laws that may not allow for a one-person corporation to purchase health insurance for the owner and effectively forcing them to purchase individual health insurance coverage that they pay for themselves . And , just to make things even more complicated , if the owner/shareholder or their spouse is eligible to participate in any other subsidized health plan they ca n't take the deduction from Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- AGI -RRB- on their 1040 for medical insurance premiums paid for by the S-Corp . So the answer to your question is sometimes `` Yes '' and sometimes `` No '' because a variety of circumstances can influence the answer . My advice is to seek out an experienced health insurance broker who can determine your specific circumstances and advise you on how to approach them .
For the average person , no , you can not deduct your premiums . However , if you are a business owner with a corporation , you can pay your premiums through your corporation . At the end of the year , you would claim those premiums paid as income . Always , ALWAYS consult your financial advisor or CPA for tax laws regarding tax laws for insurance .
That is a great question ! Many insurers are regular corporations , and some are mutual or fraternal organizations . As they make money , as in any corporation , there are dividends that may be paid . Mutual insurers are a lot like mutual funds , -LRB- I am simplifying this tremendously -RRB- in that they will generally pay those dividends , as each policy holder is a shareholder in the company . The ones that pay are `` participating '' ; the ones that do n't are `` non-participating . '' Unfortunately , there are far less participating companies than non-participating . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Homeowners Insurance Cover A Tree Falling On My Car ?
Your homeowners insurance would not cover this sort of incident , but your auto insurance may if you have comprehense insurance coverage less your deductible . Read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that may be contained within or contact your local agent to have them go overth policywith you .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
It 's the homeowner 's responsibility to remove dead or damaged trees before they fall . Homeowners insurance will not cover dead or damaged trees . Homeowners insurance will cover resulting damage and the cost to cut up the tree if the trees falls on covered property . If a tree falls over but does not hit covered property , there is no coverage . If your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , your neighbor is only responsible for the portion of the tree located on his property . The portion of the tree on your property is your responsibility even though it 's not your tree .
Homeowners Insurance will not pay for dead tree removal . A tree is a plant and it is the homeowners obligation to show pride of ownership and to take care of his or her yard . Big plant or small it 's the homeowners responsibility to maintain . Also a dead tree just sitting there and has not caused any damage to the dwelling , therefore there is no claim . I know what your thinking . The tree is a potential hazard and could fall on the house and cause damage or hurt someone . If this were to happen and you were unaware of any potential hazard there would be coverage should the tree fall on your house . However , if you are aware the tree is a hazard and fail to mitigate the hazard you are negligent and are not living up to your obligation as a homeowners and risk having the claim denied .
If you are asking if homeowners insurance covers a tree falling on your home . The answer is more than likely yes if the tree falling was caused by a covered peril . Bear in mind that their are exclusion within every policy . If you are asking about damage to the tree itself . Once again if the tree falling is because of a covered peril there may be some coverage for the tree itself . As always read over your policy completely or give your local agent a call and discuss your questions or concern to ensure that you understand your coverages .
If no one heard it fall did it make a sound when the tree crushed your car . OK , could not help myself . Your automobile comprehensive coverage would cover the damage from a falling limb . As for going after a homeowner , it 's almost impossible to prove negligence unless the homeowner had been warned both verbally and in writing that his or her tree presented a hazard . Otherwise it 's simply an act of God and the property owner is not liable . This happens allot actually . My best advise is to avoid parking under trees . If the limbs do n't get you the sap and birds will .
It depends . Where does it fall?What caused it to fall ? A tree struck by lightning is typically covered . A tree that falls due to wind is not covered unless itlands onyour property such as your home or auto . If it lands in your yard and causes no damage , there is no coverage for the tree itself . Your healthy tree that lands on your neighbor 's house is covered by their homeowners insurance not yours . Prior to making a claim , you should always talk to your trusted insurance advisor to verify your coverage .
There are two major sections to a homeowners policy , the property coverages and the liability coverages . Damage to your property caused by a fallen tree is covered by the property coverages and is adjusted after payment of the deductible . If your tree falls on a neighbors house and does damage your liability policy will provide coverage . In this case the claim will be adjusted without payment of any deductible . The one part that hasnt been mentioned is the tree itself . In most cases the coverage for the tree is quite limited . As you can understand replacing a mature tree can be very expensive . It is , however possible , that your homeowners policy has some coverage extension that will pay for the loss of a tree caused by a windstorm or similar event . Again that claim will be adjusted after payment of a deductible but the deductible isnt applied per tree , rather the entire claim .
This is really more of a legal question than an insurance question but I 'll give you some guidelines . As a general rule , if it 's on your property , it 's your responsibility . So , legally , if it 's your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , he should take care of it . This does n't always happen , and many small battles have ensued over just this type of thing . I 've seen neighbors do some pretty weird things in these situations . I 've seen people send registered letters , call the police , report to the city or township , even hire a lawyer to sue . My advice , be reasonable and talk to your neighbor , preferably before it falls , and come to some aggreement about what needs to be done , if anything . From an insurance standpoint , nothing 's really going to be done with a fallen tree unless it falls on something an causes damage . Then , in most cases , your insurance company will pay to move it off of your home , that 's it . Some homeowners policies will have endorsements available for debris removal which may pay to remove it , usually up to some limit . Many times , though , removing it from a structure is all an insurance company will do and removing the tree from your property is your responsibility .
Typical policies cover fallen trees if they cause property damage , and if they fall due to a covered peril such as wind , lighting , etc. . If a tree just falls in the yard and does not damage anything then usually the policy will not cover the removal of the tree or a replacement tree . It must cause damage and be caused by a covered peril . Hope this helps .
While in most cases it will not cover the tree itself it will cover the damage caused by a downed tree and if necessary removal of the tree from the damaged structure . If a tree falls on your house , the damage will be covered and the tree removed . The tree itself will not be replaced .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Because tree root damage is a process that happens over a period of time tree root damage would not be a covered loss . Covered losses would fall under sudden and accidental . Tree root damage is neither sudden nor accidental . In fact the damage is actually preventable if the tree is properly maintained or removed if necessary . Keep in mind , a tree is just a plant and your plants needs to be kept up . As beautiful as they are sometimes you have to take the ax to the tree .
I am going to go out on a limb here -LRB- sorry about that -RRB- and guess you mean a CAR crushed by a falling tree . IF the auto insurance policy has `` comprehensive '' coverage the damage will be covered by the auto policy . IF the property owner on which the tree stands was negligent in maintaining the tree , i.e. the tree was dead and likely to come down at any time , coverage may be provided under the liability portion of the property insurance policy . However a healthy , maintained tree brought down in a windstorm is not the result of negligence on the part of the property owner .
Generally speaking , real property damaged caused by a tree or portion thereof is covered under your Homeowners ' policy . If it is on your house , the coverage would be subject to your contract deductible of course . If it is YOUR tree , that you know has been dead or diseased and you have not done anything to mitigate the situation , and as a result , the tree falls on your neighbor 's house , then you are held responsible and the coverage would come from the Liability portion of your Homeowners ' policy . As always , it is best to ask your insurance professional about your particular situation .
If a fallen tree , whether your own or your neighbors , has landed in your yard , on car or on your home , you are likely wondering whether your current homeowners insurance policy will cover the repair costs . Damage to your home and its contents , regardless of whether the trees origin was from your own property or a neighboring , is covered under a homeowners policy . For property such as sheds , additions or detached garages , there is generally a maximum amount of coverage offered for fallen tree damage -LRB- i.e. 10 % of your entire propertys value -RRB- . Even though your homeowners insurance policy will cover damage resulting from fallen trees , it is important to keep in mind that you are financially responsible for any applicable policy deductible . For example , if your homeowners insurance policy has a $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 deductible and the total cost of repairs is $ 25,000 , you will be required to pay either $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 out of pocket for the clean-up to be completed . If the fallen tree was from your neighbors yard , it is possible that your insurance company will attempt to get their policy to cover the cost of the damage . In this event , you may be refunded any deductible you paid for the repairs .
Homeowner 's policies vary a LOT so the only way to know for sure is to file a claim . This question in particular is very tricky but as a general guideline tree removal will be covered -LRB- to a limit -RRB- if what caused the tree to fall was something sudden and accidental such as a windstorm or a lightning . On the other hand if the tree just died of disease or old age its removal will probably not be covered .
If a Tree falls on your auto and causes damage this would fall under your comprehensive coverage . A claim would be paid for your loss minus your deductible up to the value of your vehicle if it were a total loss . If you hit a tree this would fall under your collision coverage . Your loss would be paid up to the value of the vehicle if a total loss minus your deductible .
Most insurance policies will require a tree hit something like a house , fence , or another structure for the removal of the tree to be covered . If the tree simply falls down in the yard it will not be covered for removal by most insurance policies . Some policies provide coverage for the value of the tree . You should read your policy or call your local independent insurance agent to find out exactly hose your policy reads . Hope this answer helps .
Tree root damage does not fall under the category of sudden and accidental . Tree rootdamageoccurs over a long period of time and istherebyconsidered avoidable . I do understand the problem is out of site out of mind but homeowners have an obligation to maintain their property and if a plant becomes a hazard the issues needs to bedealtwith therefore root damage is not a covered peril of a homeowners policy .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Where To Start Looking For Health Insurance ?
The best place to find health insurance is from an experienced broker . Because of the complexities of the new Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- , it 's important to maximize subsidies , apply for the best plan with the available funds you have , understand Metal plans and enroll in a timely manner . LIVE answer is provided by : Ed Harris - Premier national health insurance broker for more than 33 years and owner of several top-rated healthcare websites that provide the lowest available prices .
The best place to start looking for health insurance is the internet . With free rate quotes available it 's a good place to begin so that you have an idea what insurance will cost for your situation . However , you should work with a trust-worthy insurance agent to help you navigate all the options and sort through the plans . Make sure the agent represents multiple carriers so she can find you the best benefits at the lowest rate you qualify for .
You 're generally getting your health insurance coverage from one of two places , the individual market or your spouse 's group coverage , if available.Individual health plans can be purchased on or off the health insurance exchanges . If you qualify for a subsidy , you would want to look at health insurance ON the exchanges - subsidies can only be used for on-exchange policies . The first open enrollment period under the new Affordable Care Act ended on March 31 , 2014 -LRB- some states allowed for extension to mid-April due to technical issues with enrolling through the healthcare.gov website -RRB- . If you 're looking for an individual policy , you will need a special enrollment period -LRB- a qualifying `` life-changing event '' -RRB- to purchase a plan outside the open enrollment period , otherwise you may be subject to paying a penalty . The penalty in 2014 is the greater of : 1 -RRB- 1 % of your yearly household income featuring a maximum penalty as the national average yearly premium for a bronze plan . 2 -RRB- $ 95 per person for the year -LRB- If under age 18 , then $ 47.50 -RRB- featuring a maximum penalty per family of $ 285 under this method . The penalty figures will change in future years .
When youre looking at the question of what comes first retirement or paying off debt , the answer is paying off debt . But everything really starts with a good self-inventory of your income and expenses and setting up a budget so you can start telling your money where to go instead of wondering where it all went . If you have never made a budget I can send you a free worksheet that outlines the different categories and roughly how much of your income should be going to each . After you have your budget in place your next step is to set up an emergency fund minimum of $ 500 to $ 1000 . Having an emergency fund can take the pressure off of lifes curve balls when they happen and it helps you stay on track with your budget . Then you should start paying down your debt , start with the smallest bills first , once one is paid off add that payment to the next smallest bill . Its like a snowball rolling downhill gaining momentum tackling bill after bill with more force . Your next step is to build your emergency fund up so that it could cover 3 to 6 months of your expenses in case of job loss or medical illness . Once thats in place then you can look at retirement planning . If you have any questions please feel free to call me .
That is my favorite question of the week , hands down ! What an excellent question ! The first place to start is to figure out where your money is going , and eliminate or cut back on those places where it does n't need to go . Maybe you find that you 're dining out 6 nights a week , and that it is a significant amount of your paycheck . Cut back on the number of nights , or go to less expensive places . Put together a budget , and stick to it . Take the money that you now find extra , and use it to create a stable financial foundation for yourself - create an emergency fund , pay down your debt , and start investing the rest . Once you 've created a stable platform to work from , you can be more aggressive with your long range financial plan . It will all start with knowing where your money is going , and how to make it go where you need it to , instead of where it is going now . Be the steward of your money , not its slave . Great question ! Thanks for asking !
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
How to plan for retirement when you are 50 ? First thing is look at your debt , is there anything you will be carrying into retirement ? Is there anything you can rid yourself of in the next few years ? At 50 , if you 're just getting started planning for retirement you will have to change your ways considerably because you 're getting what amounts to a late start . Look at where and how you spend money . Then if you have n't done so , take a portion of your income and start setting it aside for the future . There are many qualified plans you can use that are either employer sponsored or individual planned . Find one , start using one . What you 've lost at 50 is time . Time is very hard to replace , it requires disipline and consistentcy . Both are possible at 50 .
That is a great question ! The first step is to decide exactly what your retirement looks like to you . Do you want to travel ? Hole up somewhere and fish all day ? Live basically as you do now ? Once you 've done that , take a look at where you are financially right now . What are your assets ? What debts do you have ? How much longer do you anticipate working ? Then you can figure out how to get from where you are , to where you need to be to ensure your retirement looks like you want it to . The rule of thumb is to live at the standard that you are now , you will need to save between 8-10 times your current salary . If you are n't comfortable now , then you will need to save even more . A good advisor can help you find a way to get started , or to adjust the plans that you have . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
That is a great question , and I 'm really glad that you did n't wait any longer to ask it ! The first step would be to meet with an advisor to look at where you stand financially right now . Once you 've looked at where you are , you want to decide where you want to be . What are your goals for retirement ? Travel ? Retirement home somewhere ? These kind of goals help determine how to set up a solid plan for you . Depending upon where you are financially , you may need to change some of the things that you are doing now . Current wisdom says to live in retirement at the standard you are now , it will require that you have saved 8-10 times your current salary . I would strongly advise that you find someone that you trust to start the process for you , and the sooner the better . If you would like to discuss this further , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to make some time for you . Thanks for asking !
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies will set a commencement date far enough ahead into the future to show you an impressive number for your return , and that is the date by which you must have started taking your withdrawals . The truth is that you can take money out at any time , BUT - there are serious consequences if you are n't careful . An annuity is not a suitable product for someone who has cash flow issues , and might need the money sooner than later . I 'd advise you to look at your policy , and look for these things : Do I have a free withdrawal amount , if so , how much and when can I start taking it ? How long is the surrender period , and what are the charges ? -LRB- If the surrender period is ten years , that means every year during that period , whatever you withdraw will be subject to that fee , among likely others , as well as a federal penalty of 10 % if you are younger than 591/2 -RRB- The last thing to look at is what triggers if you pull money out . Does it start , or lock in a payment cycle for you ? Again , that could be disastrous if you are n't very careful . Let the money ride in there as long as you can afford to , -LRB- at least until you are 60 -RRB- and then start taking your withdrawals . Depending on how your annuity is structured , you may be required to start your rmd 's at the age of 701/2 . If you 'd like help with your specifics , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Before buying long term care insurance , it is a good idea to look at the area in which you anticipate you will be living when you reach the age where long term care may be needed , and see what their average rates for assisted living and nursing home care run . Talk to your family and get their ideas on arrangements if that type of care was needed . Review your budget and determine how much you have to spend on long term care , and tell that to your agent when you start . An agent can save you a lot of time and frustration from looking at all kinds of bells and whistles that you can not afford , when they know your budget from the start . These are some things that will help your long term care search start off on a good foot .
That 's a great question ! I 'm sorry to hear about your diagnosis , and pray that you are well , and healed . Here 's what you need to know - no matter how long ago you were diagnosed , or in what stage the cancer is/was , there is a company that will write your insurance policy . Several , actually . What makes the difference is when you were diagnosed , and where you are with it now . Each company will have a period of time that they `` look back '' on health histories , and that amount varies between companies . An independent agent will be a blessing to you as you look , as they will be able to sort out which company will be best . As Jason wisely suggested , do not apply for more than one policy - only apply for the one that you want . Multiple applications are a huge red flag to insurers and they will refuse you just for that reason . If your diagnosis was 3-5 years ago , and you 've been cancer free since , you should n't have any problems finding an affordable and `` same day '' coverage policy . If it 's been a year or so , then it starts getting a little more expensive , and starts coming with conditions . If it was recently , then you can still get coverage , but it will be more expensive , and come with a period of time where the paid benefit is reduced . Your cancer diagnosis wo n't keep you from finding coverage . Please contact an independent agent near you , or any of us here , and have that agent walk through this with you in a bit more detail . You 've got enough to worry about as it is , and a good agent will sort out all the details so you wo n't have to . I pray for your health and wholeness . Thank you for asking !
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
That is a really good question ! And trust me , you 're not the only one asking it ... There are really very few certainties in life , but we all seek to find as many as possible . Knowing that we have a safely protected retirement certainly ranks up near the top . While we can not guarantee that our retirement fund will last , there are some things that you can do to help ensure it : 1 . -RRB- Have a clear picture of what retirement means to you - does it mean travelling and dining out often ? If so , your fund will need to be large enough to accommodate that . If it looks more like fishing and working part time , then perhaps your fund can be a little more modest , and still be fine . But if you do not know , `` People without vision perish , '' as the Proverb goes . 2 . -RRB- Pay close attention to how your 401k is performing . If you do n't know what it is doing , you are right to worry . While I do not recommend knee jerk reactions to losses , trends are worth paying attention to , especially if they are negative , precipitous , and lengthy . 3 . -RRB- Know your spending habits . Have a very good grip on your budget process , and where you can squeeze out a little more to invest . Having good habits and keeping debt low entering retirement helps with the life of your investment also . 4 . -RRB- Do not put all of your eggs in one basket , or as you more commonly hear , diversify . Start a Roth IRA to balance out your taxable 401k ; Purchase an annuity or two to ensure a steady income stream that will not run out . Purchase some property that you can earn an income from during retirement ; invest in bonds and low maintenance mutual funds . 5 . -RRB- Plan for the inevitable medical expenses that come with age . The Law allows for a dedicated retirement account used exclusively for health care to be non-taxable , if health issues are likely , start one . Look at a life insurance policy that includes living benefit provisions , or look into long term care protection . If your company offers an HSA , enroll , and start paying into it . 6 . -RRB- Save , save , save . Find high yield savings accounts , and be certain to have an emergency account . Having one allows you to be able to not have to make withdrawals from your retirement funds , or acquire more debt . Having one allows you to be able to make investments that otherwise would only be dreams . The best way to alleviate worry is to trust ; Faith in the One who provides for us , and being a good steward of what we 're given allows us to sleep at night . Hopefully there are ideas here that will help you . Please feel free to contact me if you would like a more personal analysis of where you sit . A great question , and one I 'm glad that you asked . Thanks !
First , take care of your risks - health insurance , car insurance , home/renters insurance , life insurance . Second , you need a stash of emergency cash . I make it rhyme so it 's easy to remember . $ 1,000 - $ 2,000 is a good start . Get a safe & start sticking it in there . Crap happens - someone in India wipes out your account and it takes a week or two to get the bank to give you back your money . Third , open a savings account and save at least three months of your household expenses but six months is better . Again , crap happens and if you have to change jobs , you may need a 3-6 month cushion to find another job . Fourth , max out your company 's 401k to the extent of the company matching . That means for every dollar you put in , you DOUBLE your money guaranteed . Fifth , this is where you get into long term financial planning . Do some networking , attend some seminars , ask friends . I personally like mutual funds & annuities but everyone will give you different answers . Find a plan that meets your risk tolerance and a company you trust . You will hear a lot of noise about fees but keep it in perspective - are you getting what you pay for ? It 's not like gasoline where you get the same gas no matter where you fill up so always look for the cheapest . Different products offer different services for different fees .
That is a really good question ! More and more people are becoming worried that they will not have enough in the bank to live out retirement like they 'd hoped . There are a great number of things that you can do , many of which could depend upon where you stand financially now , and how close to/far into retirement that you are . Some simple steps ? 1 . -RRB- Eliminate as much debt as possible now . Eliminating interest on loans , credit cards , etc. will save you tons of money later on . Tightening the belt now and paying off those debts will free up cash later , when it 's needed . 2 . -RRB- Look at when you want to file for your SSI benefits to begin . If you or your spouse can hold off on starting the benefits , the payments when they do start will be larger . 3 . -RRB- Eliminate unneeded expenses , and downsize where possible . If you are living in a home that has become larger than you need , maybe downsizing the home or property could provide the money that makes the difference . 4 . -RRB- If there is available money to invest , then look at vehicles that might help down the road - annuities , or a Roth IRA that allows later distributions might be options . 5 . -RRB- Work , or making money off of hobbies is always a possibility . If you like to garden , grow vegetables to sell , or make flower arrangements , etc. that both gratify you , and add income . I wish that I had more information from you to work with in my answer , but I hope that there will be something here that will give you ideas , and hope . Thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! There are a million people that will line up to help you put together a plan . Some will honestly want to help you , and some will look at you like a wolf looks at a fat , three-legged sheep . Please be careful , and go with someone that comes with high recommendations . Here 's what you can do to get started . Take a few minutes , and decide what retirement looks like to you . Are you fishing , travelling , working , not working , debt free ? Now take a look at your current financial status . What do you need to do between here , and retirement to make that happen ? I tell people that if you want to live at your current standard of living in retirement , then you will want to have squirreled away between 8-10 times what your current salary is . If you want to live better than you are now , then you 've really got to get started . Once you 've got an idea of what you need to save , then you can talk to your HR person at work about company match 401k , or other programs they might offer ; You can talk to your insurance agent or banker and get some ideas , or you can find an advisor that can help you take a look at how to make your vision of retirement a comfortable reality . I hope that gives you an idea , feel free to drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Medigap Blue ?
Vermont BlueCross BlueShield has a health insurance product call Medigap Blue . It provides Medicare Supplement coverage to Original Medicare Part A and Part B . They offer Medigap Plans A , C , D , F and N with all the standardized benefits as with other insurance companies . Their premium rates are grouped into under 65 disabled and over 65 . Please let me know if I can offer further assistance .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
How Employer Health Insurance started ? 1920-1930 : The Rising Price of Medical Care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . The AHA designed the Blue Cross guidelines so as to reduce price competition among hospitals . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield The market for health insurance exploded in size in the 1940s , growing from a total enrollment of 20 million in 1940 to nearly 142 million in 1950 . During WWII there was a wage freeze however the Federal government permitted employees to provide benefits instead of wages . Companies began offering health insurance to employees and the employer sponsored health insurance market exploded .
In the 1920 's changes occurred that tended to increase the role that medicine played in people 's lives and to shift the focus of treatment from homes to hospitals . These changes caused the price of medical care to rise because of : Advances in medical technology Growing acceptance of medicine as a science Development of hospitals as treatment centers Encouragement for sick people to visit physicians and hospitals . Licensing and standards of care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield . That is where health insurance began
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
Blue Cross is an insurance carrier . In most states Blue will write Medicare supplement plans and in some areas they will offer MAPD -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- plans . When you have original Medicare you can buy a Medigap plan from Blue or any other carrier . Blue MAPD plans are a form of privatized Medicare .
There are many companies that offer Medigap plans , but not every company offers every plan and in every state . Most insurance companies have a handful of states they do business in for their Medigap plans and only sell several of the available plans -LRB- e.g. company XYZ only sells Medigap plans A , F , G , and N -RRB- . Since Medigap plans are standardized -LRB- meaning the coverage is the same , regardless of the company it 's through - the only difference being the price of the coverage -RRB- , it 's important to find out all of the carriers that offer plans in your zip code . Some of the big name companies in the Medigap marketplace include , but are not limited to , United Healthcare -LRB- parternered with AARP to use their name on their Medigap plans -RRB- , Omaha , WellPoint -LRB- Anthem and other Blue Cross carriers -RRB- , Aetna , Cigna , Humana , Central States Indemnity , Medico , New Era , Royal Neighbors of America , United American , and Equitable , to name a few - there are a number of other companies out there in the Medigap marketplace . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Usually life insurance is sold by a blue cross blue shield organization affliiated company only in a group plan format . . By affiliated company , I mean a private company associated with Blue Cross Blue Shield as there may be some restrictions on the Blue Cross Blue Shield organization that prevents direct sales .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Medicare Plus Blue PPO is a Medicare Supplemental Plan insurance provider in Michigan . It is an arm of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Blue Care Network of Michigan . To find out more about the health insurance offered by Medicare Plus Blue PPO visit their website at WEBSITELINK .
In Australia , a blue Medicare card is an interim card issued to individuals or families eligible for Medicare in that country . Some people in the United States may call a Medicare Supplement card from Blue Cross Blue Shield a blue Medicare card . However , Medicare cards in the US are red white and blue .
Blue Cross operates under several names around the country so the exact carrier that you would be purchasing it through depends on where you live -LRB- e.g. Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield , CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield , etc. -RRB- . You can buy the health insurance during the annual open enrollment period -LRB- starts in November this year -RRB- - if you have a qualifying event , you can purchase health insurance under a special enrollment period . I always recommend buying your health insurance through a broker as there are many products to choose from making the process of buying coverage confusing and very time consuming - insurance brokers do not charge fees for their services so you can only help yourself . If you prefer to do it on your own , you can complete the process through the health insurance exchanges via healthcare.gov . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Blue Cross Blue Shield offers life insurance to be added onto a health insurance policy that was purchased from Blue Cross Blue Shield , in some states . The Life face amount offered to add onto the Health policy is fairly small and the type of coverage offered is Term Life insurance .
With healthcare reform finding Health Insurance in North Carolina has become more challenging . While there are several companies that offer non-compliant plans outside the exchange . Only 2 offer exchange plans . Blue Cross and Blue Shield of NC and Coventry , of these Blue Cross and Blue Shieldis the only one offered statewide .
Many insurance companies offer Medigap policies including Aetna , UnitedHealthcare , Blue Cross and Humana . Depending on your state , there will be dozens of carriers that offer affordable options . Perhaps the most difficult choice , however , is not necessarily choosing the company , but actually selecting the specific Medigap plan that is best to purchase . An experienced licensed broker and their website can help you find and compare the best options and select the policy that is most suitable for you . With more than 32 years of experience in the business , I have found that picking the best Medigap plan is one of the biggest financial challenges for consumers that have retired , or are nearing retirement .
The coverages provided by a Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- are standardized and the broadest coverage is on Plan F . If you want any doctor , anywhere , anytime this is the plan for you . Though the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from carrier to carrier and from state to state . When you 're looking at a carrier , consider also any of the special terms that they offer . For example , my state , Florida , the carrier Florida Blue -LRB- Blue Cross/Blue Shield -RRB- offers to retain you present age on your pricing for renewals . This can have a big impact on your cost over time . This means that if you sign up at 65 with them , they keep charging you at the 65 year old rate as you get older . This can be a significant savings over time !
That is a great question ! I am sorry for your loss , it is tough when you do n't get to own the car long enough to even get a chance to enjoy it . Your insurer most likely uses what is called the `` Blue Book '' value to determine what your car is worth . The price that you paid three months ago most likely is higher than what the Blue Book will allow , since the car starts depreciating in value almost the minute that you drive it off the lot . They will factor in wear and tear , -LRB- dings , dents and normal wear of parts -RRB- and depreciation when they offer your settlement sum . Do not expect to get reimbursed for your tags and fees ; Those things are like gas to insurance companies , you need it to drive , but it 's not a part of the actual value of the car . If they do not give you what you want , you can always appeal the settlement , sometimes the company will give in and pay . I 'd hope so , in your case . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Medicare Blue PPO is a Prefered Provider Health Insurance or Medicare Advantage Plan offered by one of the Blue Cross / Blue Shield family of companies . With a PPO you can go to any doctor who accepts Medicare but you pay lower copay 's if you stay in the network . Many companies offer PPO 's .
Most national carriers issue policies using a national network and can be continued even if you move to another state . Blue Cross plans are an exception . If you have a Blue Cross plan and change your residence to another state you must apply for a new health insurance plan . You can apply for coverage from Blue or another carrier .
There are many insurance companies that offer Medigap or Medicare Supplement policies -LRB- the two are the same -RRB- . It will depend on the state in which you live as far as what companies are approved to sell the plans.AARP United Healthcare offer plans in nearly every State . Mutual of Omaha , Standard Life , Humana , Anthem Blue Cross , and many others . Talk with a local agent who specializes in Medigap insurance to select a plan competitive in your area .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Workers Comp The Same As Disability Insurance ?
No , workers compensation is not the same as disability insurance . Workers compensation insurance is insurance purchased by an employer to cover employees who become injured on the job and as result can no longer work . It provides income benefits to the covered employee while they are out of work . Disability insurance covers an individual regardless of the time place and manner of the event that prevents them from working -LRB- i.e. it does not have to happen at work -RRB- . Disability insurance is also generally set up to cover a larger amount of lost income .
Workers comp and disability are similar but very different . Both provide LOT -LRB- loss of time -RRB- benefits but Workers Comp covers so much more . In addition to your LOT benefit workers comp also has life insurance benefits and medical coverage for your on the job injury or illness . Disability only has a LOT benefit .
Workers Comp is disability insurance provided by your employer if you are injured on the job . Disability insurance covers you for disability on or off the job depending on the policy . Unless it is tied to your group plan you own your Disability Insurance and you take it with you . Example : Workers Comp would pay if you fell off of a ladder at work and broke your leg . It would not pay if you fell off a ladder at home and broke your leg . A disability policy would .
Areworkers comp insurance and disability insurance the same ? Yes and no . They are both the same in that they provide income when a person becomes disabled to help generate income . No , in that workers comp only applies to at work or on the job injuries -LRB- rarely if ever illness -RRB- . Disability insurance applies to off the job injuries , like sliding into second base in your softball league and snapping an ankle or illness regardless of on the clock or not .
You may not need it if you have your own plan but the limit relies on the income adjustment for you . There is a certain percentage that the income must be adjusted to . Let Workers Comp cover you at the job for it is useful . Take out an individual disability plan that is all your own . Workers Comp is mandatory for any injury on job only while your disability policy can cover you both at work and home . I know the best companies for your situation .
What is the difference between workers compensation and disability insurance ? Actually the differece is where you are at the time the disability . Workers Compensation Insurance covers you for at work activities , mainly accidents . Illness with worker 's comp is much harder to prove . Disability insurance is your off the clock , accident AND illness coverage .
Disability insurance is non taxable as income . This insurance is designed to keep the income coming in event a person is injured and not able to work . Workers Comp is designed for injury at work only and your own policy can cover you both at home and work . You can have your own even if you are collecting Workers Comp .
Disability insurance is paycheck protection 24/7 , unlike workers comp , which pays for injuries experienced on the job . Social security disability can help , but in most cases its inadequate . It is possible that you may have short term disability through your employers group benefit plan . Still the combination of all three will generally fall short of sufficient coverage . The average American worker has 90 days in cash reserves . The average long term disability period is 30 months . The odds of being disabled during your working life are a statistical probability , more than death . Is disability insurance protection with 5-8 % of your pay ? You make the call !
Workers Compensation is a form of disability insurance provided by your employer to protect you from disability caused by on the job injury . Disability insurance protects you from disability on or off the job from injury or sickness . For example , if you have a heart attack and can not work for six months , workers comp will not pay unless the heart attack has an indisputable connection to your employment . Disability Insurance would pay regardless .
State Disability Insurance is offered by the State of California through the Economic Development Dept. You are eligible for State Disability Insurance if : 1 -RRB- You are not a government worker -LRB- there are some exceptions , such as some teachers may receive it through collective bargaining -RRB- ; 2 -RRB- you must have been working or actively looking for work when your disability begins ; 3 -RRB- you must be unable to work and be off work for at least 8 days to receive a benefit ; 4 -RRB- you must have received at least $ 300 in wages from which State Disability Insurance deductions were withheld ; 5 -RRB- you must be under a doctor 's care and he/she must provide certification of your care , 6 -RRB- you are not receiving unemployment or Paid Family Leave ; 7 -RRB- you are not receiving Worker 's Comp at a higher rate than your DI rate , 8 -RRB- you are suffering a loss of wages due to your disability , 9 -RRB- you are not incarcerated , and 10 -RRB- you apply for the DI benefits within 49 days of suffering your disability .
Each state has it 's statue of limitation on Workers Comp . claim . It 's highly advisable to report your injury as soon as possible . After 30-45 days you may loose your right for a workers comp . claim . It is also known , that an injury may show up after a prolong time , like limited poisoning received during an employee visit of warehouse , where mercury was spilled . In that case , you are better to get a check up and report any injury as soon as the accident was discovered .
Workers compensation is a plan of insurance carried by your employer . It provides benefits that are prescribed by law and are specifically for injuries or illness that arises from the work place . Disability income insurance is designed to replace income when you are injured by sickness or accident and unable to perform your job that is not the result of a claim covered by workers comp .
Your employer group health insurance plan and workers compensation medical coverage usually coordinate with the other . Workers comp covers work related injury and illness . Group health insurance covers non-work related illness and injury . Sometimes the two plans will overlap which might result in a delay in paying the claim until the carriers can determine who has primary responsibility .
In order to apply for disability insurance you may speak to manage agent but do some research and get ready to.provide some information so that they may find the best fit for you . As a specialist in the accident field whereas disability questions will arise it 's best to get the lowest rates with high payouts . Also be sure you have knowledge for the difference in workers comp and your own disability policy which is best for on the job , and at home . I am always open for advice and consultation .
Most health insurance plans will cover your medical expenses when you are injured in an auto accident . There are exceptions of course . If you are injured in an auto accident while traveling on company business your employers workers comp plan is expected to be primary and your health insurance plan secondary . Your health insurance plan will exercise their subrogation rights against the workers comp carrier to recoup any `` double payment '' . Similarly , if your claim is covered in total or partially by an auto insurance carrier -LRB- yours or someone at fault -RRB- subrogation rights will kick in as well .
Where to send a claim for disability insurance benefits ? Well , the first to do would be to contact the insurance company your policy is with . They will send you paperwork to complete and return to them so the process can begin . If you are talking about a state insurance claim -LRB- workers comp -RRB- you would contact your states office that handles that type of coverage .
What is voluntary short term disability insurance ? Probably something offered through payroll deduction by your employer to provide extra income protection for their employees . STDI is paycheck protection in case of illness or off the clock injury that would n't be covered by worker 's comp . This is for those broken legs skiing or sliding into second . Those weeks of chemo when you 're too sick to work . Voluntary means it is up to you how valuable this coverage is .
Disability insurance is important because more people are injured on the job at record numbers . Disability Insurance will replace income when the worker can not perform living functions or their daily work routine . In other words they ca n't work and bring home income in order to pay living expenses . Workers Comp will pay only if employee is injured on job but an individual policy will pay for on and off the job inquiries .
Workers Comp injuries are to be reported and filed immediately . The longer you wait the more potential problems you may have with the claim as this would seem suspicious . This is not to say late reporting does not happen but there will be additional investigating . In most cases you could potentially go as much as a year but rules vary by state . If you have a legitimate WC claim I suggest you report the issue right away .
I am unfamiliar with any insurance coverage called `` Builders Home Warranty Insurance . '' There is a builders home warranty , which is essentially an escrow account maintained by the contractor . The funds are maintained to cover any future defects in workmanship due to sever changes in the area or faulty workmanship . Just to point out , insurance is for accidents . So the only insurance that could be maintained by a builder is worker 's comp , business personal property/real property and liability . Builders also maintain floaters for their tools and materials on a job site . The only insurance I could think of that might apply is a product/complete operations coverage . Even then , it is more than likely that this would excluded for contractors . I hope this helps .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Disability Insurance Necessary ?
Disability Insurance replaces up to 80 % of your income at a time when you can not work . For most people , receiving their income is a necessary factor to live a normal life without tremendous upheaval . Granted , becoming disabled itself can carry emotional , social and physical trauma . But to take away income complicates things at a time when further disruption is not needed . Social Security Disability Insurance does exist , but it takes longer to get , does not replaces as much income as an individual policy , and requires that you can not work at any job .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
Why is health insurance necessary ? Actually it 's not necessary , at least for another year . In 2014 changes will be coming . But as of today , health insurance is not necessary to have . You can self insure . The thing is if you self insure and have claims , you 're expected to pay them . So you would have to surrender assests to pay that bill . Insurance of ANY KIND is simply a form of liquid money to pay for things so that your other invested wealth can `` stay '' invested . So no insurance is never necessary , it just is a smart solution for some issues .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
If you need your paycheck to pay your bills and maintain a desirable standard of living , disability insurance is probably necessary . If you became disabled and unable to work for more than several months , it could take a year to get on Social Security Disability , and the benefit amount is very low . In addition , if you can work at `` any '' job , you may not qualify for SSDI . By contrast , long term disability insurance can pay you more , the waiting period is usually only 3 months -LRB- whatever you specify in your policy -RRB- , and if you have the `` own occupation '' feature on your policy , you will collect the benefit even if you can work at `` any '' job , but just can not perform YOUR job . In light of those facts , most people would consider long term DI an necessary expense .
To be specific about what health insurance does not cover , you would have to check your plan 's policy 's exclusions & limitations . However , if you 're asking a general question , I think the key term here is `` medically necessary '' . If your provider bills a service as medically necessary , then it would generally be covered . From a common sense standpoint , why would an insurance company cover something that 's not medically necessary . A good example of something that 's not medically necessary is cosmetic surgery .
Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met ; days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 152 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Qualifications to receive the Medicare SNF benefit : 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Although a Medicare plan may cover SNF copayments , given the qualification restrictions for the Medicare SNF benefit , Medicare beneficiaries should consider separate Short Term Care nursing facility coverage to manage the financial risk of an uncovered SNF stay .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
Breast augmentation is generally considered a cosmetic procdure and not a medically necessary procedure , therefore , it is usually not covered . Breast reduction can be considered medically necessary and covered by health insurance if the breasts are causing back and neck issues . If it is considered medically necessary the surgery is covered once a woman is 18 years old and an adult .
Most health insurance will only pay for breast reductions if it is medically necessary . Medically necessary is a subjective term . For example if you want breast reduction surgery for cosmetic reasons it would not be covered . If on the other hand if you were 5 ' 2 '' and needed reduction surgery to ease back issues posture and pain it may be medically necessary . You should check with you doctor , read your Evidence of Coverage and check with the insurance company .
Assuming the question at what age or circumstance is disability insurance needed , most advisers recommend the day you start working full time . Most American workers have 90 days in cash reserves to pay household expenditures . The average long term disability is around 30 months and the odds of a disability event during your working years is significant . And while Social security disability is available , its benefits may not be enough , so purchasing individual disability insurance is necessary and part of your defensive financial plan .
Life insurance is only necessary if you have a set outcome that you want to achieve , and you can not reach that goal without it . E.g. Maybe your goal is that your children can go to college , even if you are not around to finance their education . Do you have enough invested or saved up now to attain that goal ? If not , life insurance would be necessary if you died in a short time , because no other vehicle could provide a large infusion of cash into your assets shortly after you took it out . No one can look into the heart of someone else to determine that something is necessary for them . But you can tell that by looking at your own goals , determining if you have the funds to meet those , and then judging whether life insurance is something that could help you attain those outcomes , either in life or in death .
If you have regular Disability Insurance , you will receive a monthly benefit in the event that you became disabled . This can be used to pay any bills you want it to pay , including , but not restricted to , your mortgage . So Mortgage Disability Insurance is not necessary if you have regular Disability Insurance . Whether it is a good idea depends on your situation .
Long Term Disability Insurance is a necessary part of defensive planning . Most Americans have less than 90 days in cash reserves . During your earning years , you may experience a disability event lasting an average of 30 months . Social Security disability benefits can help as can employer sponsored short term disability insurance . But bottom line this is paycheck protection and a cornerstone product you should have in your insurance portfolio .
Disability Insurance is necessary because you NEVER know when you might become sick or disabled . While many people think , `` Oh , my savings will take care of me while I recover , '' they forget that some illnesses or injuries can be disabling for the rest of a person 's life . Having disability insurance provides you with the security of knowing that , even in the case of a prolonged injury or sickness , you 'll still receive a monthly income for a pre-determined amount of time .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Most advisers recommend the day you start working full time . Most American workers have 90 days in cash reserves to pay household expenditures . The average long term disability is around 30 months and the odds of a disability event during your working years is significant . And while Social security disability is available , its benefits may not be enough , so purchasing individual disability insurance is necessary and part of your defensive financial plan .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Optional Life Insurance Do I Need ?
You might want to consider purchasing a private policy instead of the optional life insurance offered by your employer . You may be getting the first $ 50,000 of life insurance at work for free , and the first $ 50,000 is usually a nontaxable benefit . But the amount beyond that , which is called `` optional '' life insurance , does not generally involve those perks . While the price may seem good , most life insurance policies offered through work do not stay that same price , and many end when you leave that job . If you are older or have developed a health condition when your employment ends , you may find that the prices are far higher than you could have locked in through a private policy while you were working .
Are you married ? Do you have kids ? Are they through college yet ? Do you have a mortgage ? Do you have other debts ? When do you plan to retire ? What savings do you have for retirement ? Does your spouse work ? This is just the beginning of a quality interview with an experienced Life Insurance Agent . You should have anywhere from three to ten or even twenty times your annual income , depending on the above factors and all your other needs . Most folks go with only three times their income , which is far from enough . You should be meeting with an agent who knows the right questions to ask you . Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
Before we can really answer this question I would need to know how much life insurance you have in force . The best answer I can give here now is determine how much you need , then take into account what you have in force now , then make up the difference with an additional policy or if the option is available , increase your current in force policy .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
There 's generally a limit to how much life insurance you can have . With most insurance companies , this limit is 20x your income - some companies may view a limit of 25x income or 30x income . Even if you do not have your entire coverage with one carrier , these limits will still apply - on every application , the carrier will ask you about existing or pending coverage and want to know the total amounts you have or are looking to place in force . Keep in mind , there has to be an insurable interest and a need to buy the coverage -LRB- e.g. income replacement , estate planning purposes , family protection , etc. -RRB- . The average person does n't have enough coverage to cover every financial need - generally due to their ability to write the check for the amount needed to cover every need and/or not understanding how much coverage would be necessary to cover all of the financial needs -RRB- . A life insurance needs analysis is a great way to determine how much coverage you would need to cover all financial burdens in the event of your death - as many may not want to buy the resulting amount , you can break the figures down and determine which needs are the most important to protect . Your best bet is to work with an independent life insurance agent/broker than can go through the needs analysis process with you and compare multiple options to find the program that will best serve your needs .
That 's an interesting question - do you mean how much coverage do you need to purchase to ensure the value of your belongings are covered adequately , or how much should the policy have paid out to you after your claim was processed ? In the case of coverage , you would need to have an idea of how much value there is to be insured . For example , do you have a lot of electronics , or jewelry ? If so , you would need more coverage than someone who has very few of those things . If you meant how much should you have received , that depends on a lot of things specific to your policy and claim . If you would like more information , I 'd be happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is A Health Insurance Claim Form 1500 ?
A health insurance 1500 claim form is a standard claim form issued by the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services that used by a non-institutional providers and suppliers to bill Medicare insurance companies and durable medical equipment regional carriers , as well as some Medicaid State Agencies.This form is usedwhen a provider qualifies for a waiver from the Administrative Simplification Compliance Act requirement for electronic submission of claims .
A health insurance 1500 claim form is a standard claim form issued by the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services that used by a non-institutional providers and suppliers to bill Medicare insurance companies and durable medical equipment regional carriers , as well as some Medicaid State Agencies.This form is usedwhen a provider qualifies for a waiver from the Administrative Simplification Compliance Act requirement for electronic submission of claims .
Your health insurance deductible is the amount that the covered individual must pay out of their own pocket before the health insurance plan begins paying for covered health care expenses . Deductibles can vary from one insurance policy to another . As an example , let 's say you have a health insurance policy with a $ 2000 deductible followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that amount.You are thenhospitalized for heart surgery under this policy and the total bill is $ 50,000 . You would be 100 % financially responsible for the first $ 2000 of that bill -LRB- your deductible -RRB- and the health insurance carrier would pay the remaining $ 48,000 . You have `` met '' your deductible by incurring expenses in excess of your plan 's deductible . As many healthcare providers and hospitals will tell you , there is a difference in someone `` meeting '' their deductible and actually paying their deductible expenses . So , inour example , as long as the policy holder keeps paying their health insurance premiums their health insurance will remain in effect even if the policy holder pays none or only a portion of their $ 2000 deductible amount . This is why a growing number of consumers are receiving demands for upfront payment of their deductible and co-insurance cost sharing amounts from some healthcare providers before they will provide services . I just had a friend ask me about this very situation for one of her coworkers who had recently learned she was pregnant and who was told by their OB/GYN that they wanted payment for the person 's $ 1500 deductible and their 30 % co-insurance cost sharing for the OB/GYN to provide their services to that person .
comprehensive coverage on a vehicle is coverage for anything other than a collision . this includes things such as theft , vandalism , weather damage , hitting a deer etc. the deductible refers to the out of pocket expense you have to pay if you file a claim . for example : let 's say you hit a deer , causing $ 2000 damage to your vehicle ... . the insurance company will pay $ 2000 minus whatever the deductible is . so , in this example , if you have $ 2000 damage with a $ 500 deductible , the claim would pay $ 1500 .
It depends . What is the value of your engagement ring ? Most insurance companies limit jewelry coverage to $ 1500 - $ 2500 . Check with your insurance provider to see what their jewelry limits are for personal property . If your engagement ring value is higher , then you will need to `` schedule '' that item under your renters insurance policy . Send your insurance company the appraisal document , provide a detailed description of the ring and an accurate replacement value .
Renters insurance covers your personal property and bike is consider personal property . For examble you have a nice high end bike that cost $ 1500 it get stolen at the store you must call your insurance compay and file a claim they will deduct your dedutable from the pay out . Good Luck
When you have a claim you will pay your deductible . Usually this is figured in the repair cost . If the cost of repair is $ 1500 and you have a $ 500 deductible you will be billed by the repair shop the $ 500 and you insurance would pay the balance .
How much should you pay for homeowner 's insurance ? It depends on many variables including the coverage on the dwelling , personal property , liability and other items . Naturally , where you live and what the home is insured for will play major roles in determining the premium . I know ... You want a price . How about between $ 200 and $ 1500 per year . It 's a huge range but by contacting a broker , within minutes , we can provide an exact rate .
That definitely depends on several factors . Each insurance company will apply to each State 's Department of Insurance to rate based on different variables . Depending on your State , age of home , prior loss , and discounts , average costs are probably somewhere between $ 750 - $ 1500 , and for larger homes , a bit more .
Since the owner of the policy has access to the accumulated cash value either through surrender or a loan , it is considered a liquid asset in most cases . This is especially true when you are applying for Medicaid . In Ohio , for example , cash value in a Life Insurance policy owned by the Medicaid applicant can not exceed $ 1500 . These rules vary by State so you need to check the rules in your State .
If by financial aid you mean Medicaid then yes it can . Most state will only allow $ 2000 or less in assets to qualify for Medicaid . If a life insurance policy has more than $ 1500 in cash value you will be required to dispose of the asset by either cashing it in and spending the money or irrevocably assigning the policy or cash value to a funeral trust or funeral home . If you mean financial assistance for college , then the answer is generally no , in fact it would be encouraged so that there would be money available to pay off your student loans .
In California the standard HO-4 -LRB- tenant 's policy -RRB- provides coverage D which provides additional living costs . This coverage is designed to pay the additional amount a renter would have to pay to maintain a `` normal standard of living '' when forced to leave the premises because of a covered loss . If you are paying $ 1500 per month rent and because of fire damage you must vacate while repairs are being made , and a comparable building is available and the rent is $ 2000 per month , the difference would be considered the additional amount you required to maintain your normal standard of living .
In Ohio if the cash value of a life insurance policy and other assets is greater than $ 1500 you must spend down . When it come to life insurance you have a few options depending on how long you have had the policy . Prepay your Funeral , assign the policy to the funeral home , or purchase a Funeral Trust with the cash value in the policy . A Funeral Trust policy irrevocably assigns the death benefit of a life insurance policy to a Funeral Trust set up by the insurance company and can only be paid out for expenses directly related to the funeral and final expenses . This makes the policy Medicaid Exempt . In Ohio you can put up to $ 15000 in a Funeral Trust . In some states you would need a Goods and Services contract to go along with the Trust . Your agent should be able to help you with that . If you cash surrender the policy the money can not be gifted to your beneficiary , you must spend it on yourself or use it in the ways mentioned above . There are rules in place that can preserve some of your assets . A good Medicaid Care Resource Planner or Elder Law attorney can help you with that issue .
Insurance companies tend to assign policyholders into a risk group - high risk , low risk , average risk , etc. . Life insurance companies really have only two risk classes : standard and preferred . Within these classes you can have subclasses : standard smoker . Standard non-smoker . Preferred smoker . Preferred non-smoker . And you can have preferred best and standard best subclasses as well . Table ratings are typically assessed on top of the standard underwriting class . The rating means that you basically are considered a standard risk , but due to one or more other factors , your risk is higher than the average standard risk . Insurance companies vary in how they weigh each table , but typically , each table represents a 25 % increase in price over standard . So , if your standard premium is $ 1000 per year , a table A rating would make that premium $ 1250 . A table B rating would make that premium $ 1500 . And so on . I have seen carriers assist table ratings for all types of reasons . These include a high PSA ; history of heart attack ; build ; alcohol history ; driving record ; mountain climbing ; prior drug use ; cancer history ; scuba diving ; aviation ; foreign travel . Basically , you could take a look at every one of the questions on your insurance application , and depending on your answer , an insurance carrier may want to assess extra premium . On the overall , I think that system works in favor of the consumer . You are still able to get coverage . The system is much better than a black or white , take-you-or - leave - you set up . In addition , I think that by and large these extra premiums are assessed fairly . Obviously , the broker needs to hook you up with the carrier that will most aggressively apply its underwriting guidelines in your case . One carrier may only assess a table B , but another one might be a table G ! Still another one might decline you altogether . Your broker needs to be your guide in fending your way through the life insurance carrier jungle out there :-RRB- One other important note here : carriers sometimes have sales on policies through what are called table shaving discounts . This means that for certain types of cases , for a set period of time only , they will make an offer of standard to somebody who normally would be assessed a table rating . They usually cap it at table D or so . And they usually limit it to only permanent insurance such as universal life . Sales like this can give consumers really good bargains . Basically , you could buy a permanent product for a lower cost than a term product simply because the underwriting concessions wouldnt be available on the term product . I would also like to add that carriers typically go up to table L or so . When I have a client who represents a very high risk due to a serious medical condition or dangerous hobby , I like to see how high I can get a carrier to go with a table rating . I mean , if somebody really needs the coverage and has the money to pay for it , why not put hit with the premium to make it worth your while ? Its fun to see how hungry carriers can be for somebodys business :-RRB- .
Yes , up to the policy limit . You will need to check on your policy forms and look at the cash coverage . Its usually up to $ 1500 , but may vary with different insurance companies . Talk with your insurance agent and have him or her explain the circumstances of this coverage if cash was taken from you .
Pricing will vary depending on factors like the amount of time you want coverage for ; three , six ortwelve months . Another factor is the level of income you want per month . For instanceyou canrecieve $ 1500 per month fortwelve months through US Health Advisorsthe amount would be $ 39 per month . Hope this helps .
Yes itcan bean asset , especially for Medicaid purposes . For example the state of Ohio counts any life insurance policy with cash values greater than $ 1500 as an asset . Some state vary on how this is treated . Life insurance can avoid probate unless the estate is listed as beneficiary and is protected from creditors however .
Homeowners insurance comes in different forms ; in most States , if you have a Form HO3 -LRB- Special Form -RRB- or a Form HO5 -LRB- Comprehensive Form -RRB- , Wind damage is covered to your dwelling , other structures and personal property . If you have incurred damage as a result of wind , it is important to protect the structure from further damage immediately and file a claim with your insurance carrier . If you are not sure whether to file a claim and need advice , you should contact your insurance agent and discuss the options , size of the claim and prior claims activity that you may have had within 5 years . The policy deductible will apply to the claim , in many States , you will have a separate Wind deductible which may be expressed in the form of a percentage of the coverage section being claimed against . For a homeowners insurance quote , you may click here : WEBSITELINK
The vast bulk of general liability insurance coverage written for business is provided on an `` occurrence '' coverage form . The occurrence form of coverage is triggered by the `` occurrence '' of an event that causes a loss that is neither intended or expected on the part of the insured . If the event occurs during the policy period , it is covered without much limitation to when it is reported . On the other hand , another form of coverage is written for business that is referred to as a `` claims made '' form of coverage . Again , the trigger is the loss but now , rather than determining whether the loss occurred during the policy period , the question is when the claim first becomes known to the insured and when the claim is first made with the carrier . A claim on this form of coverage does n't necessarily have to be made during the dates of the policy coverage for coverage to available for the loss . Claims made coverage is usually written for doctors , lawyers , insurance agents , and others where the advice and professional interpretation and expertise is the product covered . Claims made policies are designed to keep only the current policy term the only limit of liability exposed to loss . Occurrence policies have often had years and years of coverage limits stacked upon the other to create large pots of money to settle losses that may have occurred through many years . Language was added to occurrence policies to identify that a loss includes `` continuous and repeated exposures to the same conditions '' to help connect the chain of events in an accident to avoid having each event serve to be a separate loss .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Can You Borrow Money From Renters Insurance ?
No Renters Insurance does not have cash value . Renters Insurance is designed to replace your personal property in the event of a covered loss subject to a deductible . There is no savings feature that would provide for any type of loan . The policy will provide cash for additional living expenses if you must leave your apartment due to a covered loss .
Because of the short duration of the policy there arent any reserves in a renter 's policy . You can not borrow from a renter 's policy . The only type of insurance that does develop cash value , and thereby the ability to borrow money , is a permanent life insurance plan . Discuss this with a professional life insurance agent .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Borrowing against a 401k is both a yes and no answer as to debt . No it is not traditional debt as showing against your credit score or debt to earnings ratio , because you are borrowing your own money . It is debt as Jim mentioned , because it must be repaid within 9 months . The tax and penalty consequences are much worse than borrowing the money from a lender . It is never advised to borrow from your 401k because you are borrowing from your own future . A simple rule is if you need money today while you are able to earn an income , you will need money when you are old and sick and ca n't earn an income .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
First of all , cash value life insurance is a bundled product and a bad investment . You should always separate your life insurance from any savings or investing that you are doing . Remember , life insurance is only there to protect your assets , pay off any remaining debt , and replace an income for your spouse . With this said , borrowing from a cash value policy means that you are borrowing from yourself and paying interest on the money that is saved in the policy . At the same time , your death benefit will decrease dollar for dollar by the money that you borrowed from your cash value . Now , you are paying the same premium for less insurance . Therefore , the benefits derived from borrowing from a life insurance policy will only be on the side of the insurance company .
Life insurance policies that are designed for cash accumulation build up a reserve of cash that you can borrow from at any time for any purpose . You ca n't borrow 100 % of the cash in your policy , but usually up to 90 or 95 % depending on several variables . You can take a fixed loan from your policy which means the cash comes out of your account and you stop earning interest on this money . The charge for a fixed loan is usually very low -LRB- 0 -2 % , depending on policy -RRB- . The second type of loan is called a variable loan or participating loan . With this loan , the money comes out of the insurance company 's general account , so your money remains in your account earning compound interest . The interest rate for this type of loan is higher - usually 5 % or more or a variable rate . The amazing feature of this loan is that you can borrow money at 5 % -LRB- for example -RRB- , but your money may be in your account earning 7 % or more , creating a positive arbitrage . Borrowing against your life insurance policy can be an excellent option , but you should discuss the pros and cons of this strategy with a knowledgeable advisor .
If it 's a permanent life insurance policy that builds cash value , you can borrow from it . The amount that can be borrowed depends on how much cash value has accrued inside the policy . When you borrow money from a life insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the money is expected to be paid back and loan 's require interest to be paid on the loan . If the insured dies and there is an outstanding loan balance on it , the beneficiary would receive the death benefit less the loan amount and any interest due on the loan . It may be helpful to discuss it with your agent before borrowing from the policy to find out more about what will happen -LRB- e.g. what 's the interest rate that will be attached to the loan -RRB- when you borrow from the cash value .
This is a pretty difficult question to answer in a forum like this . I highly recommend that you speak to a professionalone-on-one to completely evaluate your needs and to see if you can borrow - and if so , if it would be financially smart to borrow from a retirement fund . Feel free to contact me if you have no one else . To give you a little idea if you could however , here are some guidelines : Most retirement funds are NOT AVAILABLE to borrow from . If you have a Defined Benefit or a Cash Balance Benefit , you can not borrow from it . You can move your funds to a different account , with professional guidance to avoid penalties . But with these types of accounts , you usually can not touch until you retire . If you have a Profit Sharing account or a 401K - you MAY be able to borrow depending upon the rules of the company that it is through and/or the rules of the company you work for . Again , however , most will not allow you to borrow . If they do , typically you can only borrow 50 % of YOUR contributions -LRB- not what your company contributes -RRB- or $ 10k , whichever is less . Again , this is a very difficult and technical topic to get a solid answer here . Look me up if I can be of any further help .
No , you can not borrow money from a term life insurance policy because there is no cash value from which to borrow . The death benefit is only paid when death occurs , so you can not borrow from the death benefit . The one exception is if you are diagnosed as terminally ill and have an accelerated death benefit rider . That would enable you to take some of the death benefit in cash if you are diagnosed as terminally ill . There are a few term policies that offer living benefits like that for other reasons , such as being diagnosed as chronically or critically ill . Improved term products like that are being developed . Keep in touch to see how you could use your term for purposes other than death , even though technically , you can not borrow money from a term life insurance policy .
In Canada , when you borrow against your life insurance policy the amount you can borrow in stated in the life insurance policy . Important to remember , when you ask for a loan quote , to ask what if any of the amount borrowed will be taxable . Borrowing against a policy directly from the insurance company is considered a `` deemed disposition '' and can trigger a taxable event . When / if you repay the amount you receive a `` tax credit '' . Borrowing directly is private . If you use the policy as collateral from a bank , the loan is not a `` deemed disposition '' and therefore does not trigger a taxable event . The amount you can borrow varies , however , guidelines range from 50 % to 90 % depending on the type of policy and investment . There are consequence and alternatives to borrowing they should be discussed with a good local agent to ensure that you are informed . On a planning note , there are a number of strategies , that leverage individual and corporate borrowing . If you have further questions , contact me . If you are in Nova Scotia , you can request a complimentary strategy session at www.jpw.ca .
Can you borrow money from your retirement plan ? Well , it 's going to depend on what type of plan you have . Some plans do allow for the request of borrowing from your account , but should you ? There are considerations to be made if this is something you are thinking about are issues like removing money from your account that could be earning a greater return than the rate you 're borrowing from . In other words you 're taking out money earning 8 % and paying it back at 4 % . Also if you separate employment the loan becomes a distribution and is considered taxable income with a possible early withdraw penalty .
Can you borrow money from a retirement plan ? It 's going to depend on the plan that you are participating in . Since the term borrowing is involved , I will assume this is about borrowing from a 401k plan . The ability and the reasons allowed for borrowing are set by both government and administration of the plan . The government has some straight forward situations where loans can be granted . What a retirement plan committee can do though is add acceptable reasons for loans . The question becomes even if loan provisions are offered , should you use this as a source of loans ? Only as a last resort . Even though you get to pay yourself back at low interest , you have removed money from your investment pool that could earn more than a low interest rate . So you could be losing money by doing this . Then if for any reason you separate employment the loan balance is immediately due . and could be considered a distribution subject to penalty . Last choice .
If the whole life policy has a cash value you can borrow from the insurance company using your policy as collateral . the amount you can borrow can be as high as 90 % . Check with your life insurance broker to be sure . In Canada , if you borrow in excess of the adjusted cost base of the policy , it will trigger a taxable event . If / when you repay the loan you receive an adjustment you can use when you file your taxes . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral , it does not trigger a taxable event . Check with you life insurance broker , to be advised of the consequents of borrowing . If you do borrow reminder to at least pay the interest on the loan to avoid compound and putting the policy ar risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Where To Get Home Insurance Quote ?
That is a great question ! Many people will turn to the internet for quotes , but I do n't recommend it . The quotes are very often generic , and will often change considerably when all the appropriate information is given . Do a couple of things , and then contact an agent -LRB- or agents -RRB- and ask fir quotes . Check with friends and family , and ask about their insurance - the customer service , cost , and how happy they are with their coverage . Then catalogue your belongings , serial numbers , replacement costs , etc. so that you have an idea of what you will need for coverage . That should give you a little better accuracy with your quote . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
A trusted insurance agent is a valuable person to know . If you dont have an agent , get recommendations from your friends , colleagues and neighbors . A trusted agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice , and communicate clearly with both you and the insurance company . Setting the limits of the policy is the most important step and this is where an agent can be of great assistance . If a claim isnt fully covered because limits were too low , you will be unhappy .
The best place to start is with your Insurance Professional . If you do n't have homeowners currently and this is a new purchase , ask about discounts that would be available for insuring your home with the same company that insures your cars . Your Realtor or Attorney would also be a great referral resource if you currently have no insurance or are moving to a new area .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance rates are based on ` RISK ' ! The risk is inclusive of the Reconstruction Value of the home , the age of the home , the geographic location of the home , the additional endorsements required by the customer and the deductible chosen . The first step is to calculate the reconstruction value , the next step is to select the requested endorsements and deductible and the third step is to qualify the home before generating the associated rate . Many carriers require the home to be within a certain distance of a fire station , fire hydrant and have protective features . Many carriers will not accept a home where certain animals known to have anaggressivetemperament reside . For a quote in AZ , CA , NV , you may obtain a quote at : WEBSITELINK For other States , you may wish to find a local agent to assist with a quote !
There is no Cooling Off Period for Property & Casualty Insurance ; Cooling Off Period is a safety feature for Life Insurance Products designed to allow the client the freedom to cancel the policy if insurance was purchased following a sales presentation . There have been many cases that people feel that they were pressured into the sale of life insurance product and therefore wish to cancel the policy.Home insurance is written on standardized forms thusregulating the actual coverage offered . Property & Casualty Products , including Home Insurance , are quoted and bound if the client decides to purchase coverage after reviewing the quote . A client may cancel the coverage at any time ; where the insurance company usually has 60 Days -LRB- varies in different States -RRB- to complete their underwriting investigation and take appropriate action . Insurance carriers will not allow the backdating cancellation of a policy unless there is a situation where duplicate insurance exists -LRB- proof will be required -RRB- or if the home has been sold at a prior date -LRB- the closing statement showing the sale date will be required -RRB- . For those seeking an online quotation , there is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Getting the best life insurance quotes can be like walking a tightrope . Some agents will quote low just to get your application . Then when you are approved , they simply send you the policy , assuming you will be tired of the process and just give in and accept it.Other agents quote high because they would rather give you good news that your rate turned out lower than higher than quoted . What really matters in the end , is that you get a policy with a life insurance company that is favorable to your type of health , age , and the type of policy you get -LRB- Term , Whole Life , or Universal Life -RRB- . So no matter what quote you get , you need to pay close attention to the credentials of your agent . Some things to look at are : 1 -RRB- Are they able to shop for you from more than one company ? 2 -RRB- Do they ask questions to determine what policies and ratings you qualify for ? 3 -RRB- Do they appear to understand your health condition -LRB- s -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Do they have a following as evidenced by testimonials , referrals , etc ? 5 -RRB- If they have a website , does it have security and privacy features ? 6 -RRB- Do they appear to be sincere and honest ? If you can get in touch with an agent who has those credentials , chances are that your quote will be as accurate as possible . More importantly , no matter what your quote is , you will have the best chance at being approved at the best rate with the best company for your particular health and age .
the most efficient way to get a lower auto insurance quote is to get quotes from several independent auto insurance agents . that way , you 're only contacting a handful of agents but can get quotes from dozens of companies . word of caution : if you 're getting a quote online , make sure the websites you get quotes from have a name , address and phone number listed . If not , you 're quoting with a lead generation site . lead generation sites do not sell insurance . they simply sell your information to insurance agents . you may find the lowest rate this way , but your phone will blow in the process . any legitimate agent will have their info listed on the website .
Life insurance quotes are an estimation of the premiums you would pay for a given life insurance coverage structure -LRB- face amount and term length -RRB- . However , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . So if you run a quote at the most preferred rates and have n't factored in your height/weight , medications used , medical conditions , family medical history , tobacco usage , driving history issues , participation in extreme/hazardous activities , and a number of other factors , then the quote figures you ran are pretty much useless as they do not represent an accurate picture for the proposed coverage . The risk classification is the MOST IMPORTANT part of any quote an insurance agent gives you because the risk classification determines the premiums for the coverage . The final risk class a carrier approves you at after underwriting your policy will tell you what premiums the carrier will require for the coverage to be active . Many individuals like to see quotes with the most preferred rates -LRB- preferred plus risk class -RRB- as they are the cheapest cost and then they end up thinking that 's what they should get -LRB- and if they do n't get it , then they will forget the entire process and not even bother securing any coverage at all -RRB- . What you apply for is not always what you get - not everyone qualifies for the best rates . For example , if you have a major medical condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack , diabetic , had cancer , etc. -RRB- and the quote that was ran was for a preferred plus risk class , you 're wasting your time applying for it because every carrier is going to offer a higher risk class -LRB- and therefore require higher premiums -RRB- for the coverage -LRB- or possibly decline or postpone you for coverage depending on the details of the medical history -RRB- . This is why it 's critical to work with an experienced , knowledgeable , independent life insurance broker who knows the right questions to ask and can shop the case among multiple companies so they can give you the most accurate quotes up front that represent a realistic expectation of what you can expect to pay for the desired life insurance program . An important note : You NEVER want to just apply to a bunch of companies to see what sticks as this actually works against you because it 's a red flag to insurance companies when they complete the MIB check during underwriting -LRB- Medical Information Bureau - every carrier checks this because if you were declined by other companies , they want to know why -RRB- . You want to have your best -LRB- and most accurate -RRB- estimate up front so you get it right the first time so you can get the best rates for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Insurance quotes are a very detailed process which will require first finding out which insurance companies write policies in your area . Contacting insurance agents local to your area is the best way tO search . I always feel quoting with more than one insurance carrier is best . An independent agent in your area can usually quote you for three or more carriers at one time . Also , if you search for independent agents online that write insurance in your state you can get multiple quotes . Once you select an agent , you will be asked for personal information , claims history , and information specific to the home . The more you know about your home the better off you will be . Additionally , remember to get replacement cost coverage , a water backup endorsement if you have a basement , schedule any valuable personal property especially jewelry , and ask about any other coverage endorsements they have available . Request the quote in writing , so that you have the ability to review the coverage and its associated cost .
The internet has dramatically changed the way people shop for life insurance , period . Finding quotes online for California or any State are pretty easy . Find a website with a life insurance quote engine and begin your quotes , keep in mind that most quotes online are just estimates you could be better off speaking with a live independent broker . Make sure to speak with a broker because he or she will shop many different companies to get you the best price and policy possible . With some technology to day online you can get quotes and buy a policy within minute 's right from your home or office if you qualify .
A typical home insurance policy has several pricing points . The first is the location where the property is located . Another factor is the amount of money it would take to rebuild the same structure . Other factors include the amount of liability protection desired and the claims history of the applicant and the home . It is wise to get a quote on homeowners insurance prior to purchasing a home . Occasionally there are reasons that the home doesnt qualify for standard insurance . That could increase the cost of home ownership .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
To get Life Insurance online in New Jersey , go to a website that offers life insurance in your state . You can input your date of birth in an `` instant '' quote engine to see if a quote comes up for New Jersey , look for a site that offers life insurance in all 50 states , or put your zip code where requested . Once you get the quote . the online agency will guide you through the rest of the process . It is different for different types of policies and different companies . But in the end you have a policy just as if you had walked into a life insurance office , and you will not have had to drive anywhere or have someone in your home to purchase it .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Different websites have different ways of giving quotes online . With ours , you can put in your information and get quotes instantly , then change the variables to get different types of quotes . We also give average quotes for some health conditions . With others , you put in your information , then someone calls you with the actual quote . Either way , it is a good idea to talk to an agent to give the extra health details , help you decide the amount , and finalize your best , most accurate quote .
California life insurance quotes can be found online through life insurance websites that have a quote engine that you can use -LRB- most do -RRB- . If you want to compare multiple companies at the same time , I would recommend using the quote engine from a life insurance broker website -LRB- brokers are insurance agents who can quote and sell products from multiple companies -RRB- . The quote engines will typically request a few pieces of data such as your name , date of birth , height/weight profile , any prescriptions you take or medical conditions you 're being treated for , the state you live in , and the amount and length of coverage to quote . Once you hit submit , an instant quote will be generated for you to review and an agent will likely follow-up with you shortly . Please note , an instant quote is , in short , just a rough estimate . The risk classification you qualify for is the MOST important factor in creating a quote because it 's what determines the premiums for the desired coverage -LRB- e.g. being approved for a standard risk class vs. a preferred plus risk class will result in very different numbers -RRB- . If you are being treated for any medical conditions or take a number of prescriptions , you will get a much more accurate response by consulting with an insurance broker.who can shop the case for you . Buying life insurance can be a very strenuous and time consuming task when you try to do it on your own . We do not charge any fees for our services , so you can only help yourself by talking with a broker . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best and most honest single piece of advice when selecting a Home Insurance Contract is to make a list of items most important to you , do not place yourself in a situation where you have to make a rushed decision and always place the cost -LRB- Premium -RRB- -LRB- $ $ $ -RRB- as the last item of importance . Having stated the above , more than 90 % of homeowners simply call two or three insurance carriers in a rush to obtain a quick quote thereby comparing the 2 or 3 prices quoted and rush to purchasing a new home insurance policy . Coverage is the primary purpose of the insurance policy ; there are a variety of coverage items that conclude an insurance contract . The Dwelling , Other Structures , Personal Property , Additional Living Expenses -LRB- Loss of Use -RRB- , Personal Liability & Guest Medical Payments . In the event of a loss , each of the coverage items suddenly becomes very important to the homeowner ; for this reason , when purchasing a policy it is important to take the time to review coverage . A thorough review should n't take you more than an hour and it should n't be necessary every year unless there has been a change in insurable interest . The policy should cover your property on a replacement cost basis , you should review any additional available endorsements and make sure that your coverage limits are sufficient to protect you in the event of a loss . If after your thorough review , you feel that the premium is too high , it may be advisable for you to reduce the carrier 's risk by increasing your deductible thereby reducing the premium . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
You can easily compare term life insurance quotes by going to a website that shows you quotes from multiple companies . If you pick a website with `` instant '' quotes , the quotes will come up comparing quotes from different companies , and you can then change variables to compare quotes on different policies within that company . Once you see a policy you are interested in , be sure to talk to someone at that agency , or communicate by email , so that you can be sure you qualify for that particular rate . No quote engine can cover every question , and you may find that there is an even lower price out there for you , or a policy that works better for your needs . But comparing quotes online is a good place to start .
There are plenty of places where you can compare auto insurance quotes . The most efficient way is to get quotes with independent agents . That way , you only have to enter your information once and get quotes from multiple companies . But be careful of websites that do n't list an agent 's name , address and phone number ! Those are sites that simply sell your info to multiple agents as leads -LRB- meaning your phone will blow up -RRB- .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Buy Variable Life Insurance ?
That is a great question ! Of the three types of life insurance , term , whole life , and universal -LRB- or variable -RRB- variable is the most complicated . The things that make it different also make it riskier . This is not the policy for you , if you do not like risk , or do not want to have to keep track of its performance . This policy is called `` variable '' because your payments can vary . This can be a problem , if you send in a steady payment amount , and the policy expenses are more than the payment you are sending . Your policy will eventually eat itself alive , and collapse . If you are someone who likes risk , and will pay close attention to your policy 's performance , the policy can be a valuable part of your financial plan . This type of policy can -LRB- I repeat Can -RRB- generate large cash values , if the needed variables all fall into place . Talk to your agent or advisor , and see if this policy is what works best for you . Thanks for asking !
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
I ca n't think of a time that Variable annuities are a good idea . If you are going to buy an variable annuity , you might as well just buy mutual funds . Why pay the fees attached to the variable annuity ? The only feature of a variable annuity that is even attractive is the income rider and you can get the same or better income rider from an indexed annuity that wo n't give you the growth potential that a mutual fund would but it does offer downside protection .
That is a great question ! The question is really not accurate though , it 's like asking why all dogs bite people . Not all dogs do , but the ones that do give them all a bad name . Are variable annuities bad ? They most certainly can be , if your risk tolerance is low , or your allocations made unwisely . Just like you would pick a dog that suits your needs and temperament , you should choose an annuity to suit you also . The risk in a variable annuity may not be right for you , but may suit someone else quite well . Please take the time to discuss what you are looking for with an agent that will listen , and take your concerns to heart . If they pressure you , or appear to be more interested in the sale than what you say , do n't buy , and send them packing . Annuities are not something that you can afford to buy without completely understanding what you 're buying . I hope that helps , please contact me if you need more information , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There is no one answer to this question , since it depends on your own variables . That is why you should consult with an experience insurance agent . I urge you to consider : are you married , do you have children , do they live at home , do they have college ahead of them , do you have a mortgage on your home ? What is your income and is it expected to rise in the next several years ? With these variables in mind , you should have anywhere from three to 10 times your annual income in total face value life insurance . And the only way to be sure it will still be there as you get older , is to buy permanent life insurance now . If you feel you can not afford that , at least buy some of term and some permanent , and gradually increase the permanent as you can . Thank you . GARY LANE .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
When you ask which life insurance is best in Illinois there are a lot of thing to consider . First of all why are you buying the policy ? Are you buying it to pay your house off if you die , to pay for a funeral , to leave your family with extra money to help them re-adjust their life after you die or are you buying it as a retirement vehicle to replace your 401K . When you figure outthe why , then we can start to narrow down which company has that type of insurance to meet your needs . My years of experience has taught methat there is no one company that can meet all the individual needs of every person . I always look at the WHY first , then I can educate you on the different companies that could fit your needs . If you need more help feel free to Skype me or call 630-918-1673
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
Universal Life Insurance , or UL , as it is written , is fixed . If you buy a Variable Universal Life policy , it will be labeled as such -LRB- or shortened to VUL -RRB- . You can not buy a Variable Universal Life insurance policy from an agent who is not registered with FINRA and licensed to sell securities . You can buy a UL from any agent licensed to sell life insurance .
You dont have to bother if you dont have to . At least in this country for the time being , life insurance is not something that the government forces us to buy . And I hope the day never comes , because it would really mess up the life insurance marketplace . So the purchase of life insurance is voluntary . Who , then , should buy it ? If you are a billionaire , should you buy life insurance ? Sure you should . Lets suppose your estate would owe the government $ 100 million in taxes when you die . To pay this fee , your heirs might have to liquidate a bunch of businesses and buildings and other assets . They would then pay the bill dollar for dollar . Or , you could buy life insurance and pay the bill for pennies on the dollar . And keep all your assets intact as an inheritance for your heirs . Not only that : lets suppose you started a foundation to eliminate world hunger or some other noble cause . Lets suppose you wanted to leave the charity $ 100 million as a gift when you died . If you bought a life insurance policy and left that to the charity , you would only have to pay a few cents in premium for every dollar a benefit . You would have that much more money left over for other good causes . A very good use of your money . Now , lets suppose youre not a billionaire . Should you buy life insurance ? Heres the question : do you have a more economical way to take care of your family ? They have become dependent upon you . Why force them to reduce their standard of living when you die ? You could start putting money away into a fund . But what happens if you tragically died next year ? Would you have really accumulated enough money to let them live their lives ? Life insurance would provide them with all the money they need as soon as it is needed . No other financial product comes to the rescue like that . Why not die looking like a hero , as someone who cared and took measures to provide for his love ones ?
That is a great question ! There are just about as many different variable annuity products out there as there are varieties of ice cream . And even more potential rates of return . You would really need to first understand that any variable annuity will offer several crediting options that will play a part in your return . Then understand that the performance of the underlying investments plays a part , and that the policy 's floors , caps , participation rates and guarantees all factor in . Variable annuities can be a great investment , or a very bad one , if you do n't understand how and why they work the way they do . Please consult a trusted agent or adviser before purchasing one of these products . If you are less risk tolerant , perhaps an indexed annuity might be a better product . They are tied to market performance , without the risk , and safer guarantees . Ask your agent or adviser to show you a couple of each to compare , okay ? Thanks for asking !
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
Can you lose money with a variable annuity ? Yes , because you 're buying a product that allows you the opportunity to make more money than a fixed or even an indexed annuity can offer . So with the opportunity of greater gains also comes the possibility of greater loss . If you were to choose a Variable Annuity as an investment choice , it would require you to pay attention and make adjustments as you go . A Variable Annuity is not really a product that you buy and forget about till you need it .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Long To Plan For Retirement ?
Retirement planning should begin now . It is never too soon . Retirees rarely think that they have too much money . Because many retirement programs offer tax free compounding of earnings , the results of an early start are truly amazing . Determine what the maximum amount you can legally contribute to an IRA , pension plan or whatever program available to you . Try to put aside as much or that maximum amount every month . Stick with your plan .
Planning for retirement requires paying yourself first with disciplined deposits into a retirement account from every paycheck from the first day of employment . If your employer sponsors a defined contribution plan and matches a portion of your contribution , do it ! If there is no retirement plan at work , consider an IRA or Roth IRA . You should face the fact that you may be working until age 70 because of the new mortality trends in life expectancy and living to at least age 90 .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
Regardless of whether you are in you 50 's and are asking how do I start planning or if you are asking how do I plan on retiring when I am in my 50 's the process is the same . First determine what a successful retirement would look like for you . Once you have a basic outline then you can determine what needs to be done to fund it . The next step would be to work with a financial planner to calculate what needs to be done and how your resources should be allocated to make it happen . You will find addition information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The best retirement plan for you needs to be tailored to your financial goals . You need to determine whether you are going to fund a qualified or non qualified plan . You need to determine your retirement time horizon . How long and how much will you contribute ? You need to establish your risk tolerance . What returns are you looking for and what is your risk to your contributions ? You need to estimate your life expectancy . How many years will I live during retirement ? These are a few factors that can assist you and your adviser is selecting the right retirement plan for you .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
In order to determine how much you need to save for retirement , you first need to define what a successful retirement means to you . The next step is to do a budget to determine what is needed to finance your desired lifestyle . This is a better approach than simply randomly choosing a % of your current income . There are calculators available on many websites to help you determine how much you will need to save to generate a specific retirement income . Given the complexity of retirement planning though , you would be best served working with a financial or retirement planner . There are resources and additional information on Retirement Planning on my website , www.jpw.ca . It includes a Retirement Planning Checklist that will save you time and money . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Retirement doesnt change the nature of many risks faced by an individual . If you operate an automobile you will want sufficient insurance to meet any anticipated loss . It is important to remember that when you experience an uncovered loss and are retired the money to cover that loss will come from your retirement savings in most situations . Be sure to carry the highest possible liability limits . Consider an umbrella policy . If you own a home you will want sufficient insurance to protect valuable assets against loss . This is also a good time to increase the limit of liability insurance because a lawsuit could ruin your retirement plans . As people age they tend to acquire inherited property . That property needs to be reviewed and insured as appropriate . There are few of us that actually outgrow our need for life insurance . Our death is going to have a financial impact on those we love . To that extent consider permanent insurance . Single premium life insurance can play a particularly helpful role in paying final expenses but also can be used to establish bequests . Many retirees carefully protect their savings so they can pass something to their heirs . It might be beneficial to establish those gifts through life insurance and thus be able to spend freely the money that remains . Life insurance is also needed if the death of one spouse will have a serious impact on the retirement income of the survivor . Sometimes it is appropriate to select a life income option on a pension plan or annuity and then purchase life insurance to make up the loss of survivor benefit . Many retirees are concerned about charities and life insurance is a wonderful way to handle those interests as well . The most ominous issue for most retirees is long term care . Studies show that these expenses are one of the top concerns among retirees . With the increase in longevity comes an increased possibility of having a long term care need . Considering long term care insurance in a retirement budget is important . Health tends to decline , not improve with age . One option available is to take advantage of the Health Savings Accounts typically offered by employers who are enrolled in their companies high deductible plans . This tax incentive allows the individuals to contribute with pre-tax dollars and enjoy the gain on investments held in the account tax-free . Employers are often linking the HSA to the retirement program which helps employees understand that they can use the account to accumulate money for their medical needs in retirement . Some people will accumulate a substantial amount . Since these funds are not subject to required minimum distributions at seventy and a half they can continue to increase in value until needed . Because Medicare doesnt provide complete medical coverage most retirees purchase a Medigap supplemental insurance policy from a private insurance company . State administrators are involved in the coverage that these policies provide and sometimes in their pricing . Another form of insurance available to seniors is longevity insurance . This is effectively a deferred income annuity which isnt means tested until age 85 . Traditional Long term care insurance should not be overlooked . While the cost is subject to a great deal of debate the alternative is to assume the risk personally . Hybrid life and annuity policies can provide long term care coverage under certain conditions . In retirement expenses continue and retirees are often called upon to select between their own needs and the wants and desires of heirs . Anything that can be done to fence off expenses can make difficult decisions easier .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Who Is The Least Expensive Auto Insurance ?
The least expensive auto insurance company ? Actually , there are about a dozen answers . Depending on the state where you live , it could be State Farm , Progressive , Esurance , Farmers , Geico , Allstate , Erie , Liberty Mutual or one of many other companies . Rates are based on many factors and in any given area , it could be one of many options . An experienced broker and their website is a great resource to shop , compare , and find the best car insurance rates in the US !
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Operating a car is expensive . Interestingly , it is much more expensive in most other countries . Insurance is one of the expenses of owning a car . If you have enough cash on hand to purchase another car should your car be determined to be a complete loss in an accident , you really dont need physical damage , comprehensive and collision , coverage at all . However it is unlikely you could pay for a large lawsuit resulting from personal injury and property damage that comes from an accident in which you are the guilty party . For that you should carry the highest liability limit that you can afford . What often appears to be the least expensive auto insurance can become the most expensive policy possible if the lawsuit and judgment exceeds the limits of liability in your auto policy . The cheapest auto insurance is the policy that pays the highest possible amount when you are sued .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
USAA is a very good and large insurer that operates as an auto insurer and as such may be higher or lower than a competitor . A few years ago my daughter moved from USAA to another independent agency company and was able to buy a renters policy , and auto policy and an umbrella all for less than her USAA auto policy . All auto insurance is regulated by individual states , so you can expect that an usurer can reflect its appetite for auto insurance in that state in its pricing . No company can be the least expensive in every state for every set of conditions . That is not a realistic expectation . You should be aware too that insurers often build elaborate rating algorithms which can produce several million price points across their business in a particular state . So your carrier may believe that a 16 year old with Corvette is not insurable to that carrier while another insurer might say the exposure is fine since they are exacting what they consider an adequate rate for the exposure .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
The methodology to determine if indexed universal life -LRB- IUL -RRB- is a good investment is the suitability of the investor . IUL is a long term commitment with surrender charges in the first 9-15 years that can be punitive , so the need for liquidity cant be a priority . Consumers who need liquidity are not suitable for IUL . Like all investments , IUL has policy expenses ; chief among them is the cost of insurance . If the insured is a smoker or the nonsmoking health classification is standard or substandard , the cost of insurance may be prohibited , so health becomes a suitability item . Additional policy expenses beyond the cost of insurance could also be a suitability consideration . The policy expenses are deducted from the premium . In a year that the index is negative , nothing is added to the index accumulating amount , but policy expenses are nevertheless deducted from the policy . Keep in mind that the S&P 500 was negative from 2001 - 2003 , and the average policy expense were greater than 4 % , so they generated a 4 % compounded loss over three years . And remember , thatdoes n'tinclude any surrender charges . The # 1 unaddressed policy expenses IUL as an investment is policy expense loans , which are generally illustrated with fixed or variable loan charges at current company practice . There are loan rate caps , regardless in a negative crediting year ; with the policy generating income the loan cost could be economicallynonviable . IUL must be designed with the least expense loads at the policy issue date . The investor must hold the contract for the life of the insured to maintain the minimal coverage purchased and tax advantages of life insurance income . A life insurance professional , whose expertise in the design and architecture of IUL as an investment is imperative . The vast majority of life insurance agents selling IUL woefully lack the training and knowledge to construct IUL as an investment .
In addition to losing your license and visiting your local jail , you could subject yourself to financial ruin by not carrying auto insurance . The primary purpose of auto insurance is to protect yourself and others in the event of an accident . The vehicle itself should really be the least of your concerns . Dependent upon the circumstances , auto insurance could provide you coverage for injuries sustained by you . your passengers and others involved in the accident . Additionally , auto insurance could provide you with legal defense in the event you are sued . These are only some of the consequences you could face by not carrying adequate auto insurance . That 's why it is important to have an agent you can trust where you can sit down to discuss how to best protect yourself .
Those who have worked in the Social Security system at least 10 years , are a US citizen or legal resident and have lived in the US at least 5 years are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B at age 65 If you are the spouse of someone who is qualified for Medicare , meet residency requirements and have been married at least a year , you are enrolled as well at age 65
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
People who qualify for Medicare Part A must first of all be US citizens , or lawfully residing in the US for at least 5 years . They must be age 65 , or else can qualify for Medicare Part A at a younger age if they have ALS , ESRD , or have been on Social Security Disability for at least 2 years . To get free Part A , they must have worked at least 40 quarters in which they paid Social Security taxes , or be/been a spouse of someone who did . These are the general guidelines . For specifics , call 1-800-medicare .
This is a very complicated subject . In California all the drivers in a household are included on an auto policy . Parents dont want the additional expense of insuring their cars with an inexperienced driver in the household . Some purchase a car and place the car in the 18 year olds name . They then buy the cheapest auto insurance with just the bare legal limits . The problem arises when the inexperienced driver injures others in an accident and the injured party starts suing . The lawyers will not stop at the limits of the policy purchased for the 18 year old . I have seen them even go after grandparents who loaned money to the 18 year old . Your only recourse is the low limit policy purchased for the car . The rest of the lawsuit comes after everything that you own . It is usually cheaper to include the inexperienced driver on the family policy . If you add another car you can isolate the expense to that car but at least you can have the advantages of discounts and perhaps save yourself from bankruptcy down the road .
Although many auto insurance companies inquire about occupation , the answer you give them does not affect the rates . They ask this question as more of a screening than anything else . They want to make sure you are not using the vehicle for commercial use -LRB- which would not be covered under a personal auto policy -RRB- . For example , if you list your occupation as a delivery driver , they may ask you additional underwriting questions to make sure you are insuring the vehicle on the right type of policy -LRB- or at least make you aware of the fact that you 're not covered while using the vehicle commercially -RRB- . There are however , private insurance companies who only sell to certain groups -LRB- e.g. military personnel , teachers , govt . workers , etc -RRB- They can offer very low rates at times . But never have I seen the type of occupation affect rates with a public auto insurance company .
Tax qualified life insurance was established in conjunction with HIPAA in 1996 so that people who itemize could deduct long term care premiums as a medical expense on their tax returns . It also allows those who collect on their long term care insurance to receive their benefits income tax free . Tax qualified -LRB- TQ -RRB- life insurance policies have different triggers than traditional long term care insurance , which can make it harder to receive benefits . One of the triggers that was dropped was `` medical necessity '' . Therefore , a person can not get payments from their TQ LTCI policy just because a doctor wrote a letter saying they need that type of care . Also , their inability to perform at least two ADL 's must be anticipated to last at least 90 days .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Each renewal of your auto insurance insurance policy your carrier if they wish may raise your auto insurance premium . A notice of the increase in rates is typically sent at least thirty days before the policy comes up for renewal . Almost all auto insurance policies are active for a six month or one year term .
An SR22 is n't insurance . It is a state filing that attaches onto an auto insurance policy . an sr22 is a guarantee that you are carrying at least the state minimum auto insurance liability coverage . thus the cost of an sr22 can vary greatly , because it is highly dependent of your auto insurance rate . Things such as what vehicle you are driving , what coverages you need , your driving record , your age , and other things all go into that rating .
The answer is yes , unless your husband has coverage on a separate auto insurance policy . In Wisconsin at least every person in the household must be listed on an auto insurance policy or they must be listed on anouther auto insurance policy . Typically having more than one person listed on a policy will lessen the cost of coverage as opposed to having seperate policies . Contact your local agent to find out the premium difference between a combined policy and individual policies .
Nearly all carriers use credit in underwriting . The only variable is what sorts of events they rate on and how important it is to the rating process . Many will overlook credit , although Effective Coverage works with at least one auto insurance company in Texas who does not do a credit check for auto insurance .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Centers For Medicare And Medicaid ?
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services -LRB- also known as CMS -RRB- is a US Department of Health & Human Service agency . They are responsible for running several federal health care programs with Medicare and Medicaid being the 2 main programs . Medicare is a federal health insurance program that you are eligible for at age 65 or if you qualify from a disability . Medicaid is a federal and state run program . It provides health care services for certain individuals who qualify based on their income .
-- > Both Medicare and Medicaid are insurance programs provided by the government for the most vulnerable groups to illness and injury . Both programs receive money from the federal government , but Medicaid is actually managed by the individual states . Medicare is for those over age 65 and with certain medical conditions while Medicaid is for anyone with limited income . Individuals needing to sign up for Medicare must do so through the Social Security administration . The Medicare website provides excellent information on the various benefits and additional coverage that may be available . Those interested in applying for Medicaid can now do so through their state or federal health exchange website or call center . -- > Normal 0 false false false EN-US X-NONE X-NONE -- > -- > / * Style Definitions * / table.MsoNormalTable -LCB- mso-style-name : `` Table Normal '' ; mso-tstyle-rowband-size :0 ; mso-tstyle-colband-size :0 ; mso-style-noshow : yes ; mso-style-priority :99 ; mso-style-parent : '' '' ; mso-padding-alt :0 in 5.4 pt 0in 5.4 pt ; mso-para-margin-top :0 in ; mso-para-margin-right :0 in ; mso-para-margin-bottom :10.0 pt ; mso-para-margin-left :0 in ; line-height :115 % ; mso-pagination : widow-orphan ; font-size :11.0 pt ; font-family : `` Calibri '' , `` sans-serif '' ; mso-ascii-font-family : Calibri ; mso-ascii-theme-font : minor-latin ; mso-hansi-font-family : Calibri ; mso-hansi-theme-font : minor-latin ; -RCB-
That is an excellent question !! Medicare is managed by a department of the Federal Government called the CMS - the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services . It falls under the wing of the Department of Health and Human Services , and it manages the trust funds that fuel Medicare and Medicaid . There are two trust funds - one that is funded by payroll taxes , and by other taxes , investments , and earned interest . The other one is funded by Congress , premiums paid on Medicare B and D , investments and interest earned . Congressional cuts to the programs have hurt one fund , and the one that is funded by the payroll taxes is in danger of becoming underfunded within the next 20 years -LRB- 2029 , last estimate , with the additional funds culled from excesses in the program recaptured by the Affordable Care Act , AKA Obamacare - without them , 2024 -RRB- because the workforce is steadily shrinking -LRB- less collected tax -RRB- as the number of senior citizens eligible for Medicare and Medicaid increases -LRB- approximately 10,000 people turn 65 daily -RRB- . It does n't help that the Government in the past has raided the Social Security and Medicare trusts to fund other things that they felt were more important . I hope that that answers your question , if you would like more detail give me a buzz , and I 'll give you more . Thank you for asking !
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services -LRB- also known as CMS -RRB- is a US Department of Health & Human Service agency . They are responsible for running several federal health care programs with Medicare and Medicaid being the 2 main programs . Medicare is a federal health insurance program that you are eligible for at age 65 or if you qualify from a disability . Medicaid is a federal and state run program . It provides health care services for certain individuals who qualify based on their income .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Medicare is administered by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMMS -RRB- . This is a division of Social Security charged with setting the rules and guidelines of Medicare and Medicare related matters . Original Medicare , Medicare Advantage Plans , and Medicare Prescription Drug Plans fall under this umbrella . If you are in original Medicare then Medicare will pay any claims . If you select a Medicare Advantage Plan , then Medicare pays the insurance company to administer the claims .
Definitely . It is ran by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services , a Government Agency given the responsibility of overseeing and administering Medicare and Medicaid . Even Medicare Advantage Plans , which are administered by private insurance companies are strongly regulated by CMMS . They work along with Social Security and Jobs and Family Services to insure that your benefits are available and properly administered .
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- provides all operations and oversight for these two programs and is a part of the Federal government . Medicare is for people who are 65 and over , or for individuals with certain disabilities and Medicaid is designed for low income individuals that would otherwise be unable to afford health care . Medicare only pays for services that are deemed `` medically necessary '' .
The purpose of CMS -LRB- Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services -RRB- is to achieve a high quality health care system with the idea of providing better care at lower costs for all Americans . The program covers 100 million people through Medicare , Medicaid , Children 's Health Insurance Program and the Health Insurance Marketplace .
A health insurance 1500 claim form is a standard claim form issued by the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services that used by a non-institutional providers and suppliers to bill Medicare insurance companies and durable medical equipment regional carriers , as well as some Medicaid State Agencies.This form is usedwhen a provider qualifies for a waiver from the Administrative Simplification Compliance Act requirement for electronic submission of claims .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Medicare is a Federal run program administered by the Center For Medicare and Medicaid Services . An individual who qualifies for Medicare can also select a Medicare Advantage Plan . Medicare Advantage is under the oversight of the CMMS , however the plans are administered by private insurers . These plans are available in certain areas . You can find what is available at Medicare.Gov or an agent knowledgable in Medicare Advantage Plans can help you find a plan in your area . The most common in Ohio are United Healthcare , Anthem , Humana , and Aetna.There are also some smaller local plans such a SUMMA , and AultCare in the Akron Canton area .
First of all , Medicare is ran by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services or CMS as it is more popularly known . This is a federal agency so it is not state ran . Therefore , all states equally accept what Medicare pays as the final payment and can not balance bill a senior . Physicians must take a certain percentage of patients that are one Medicare . They agree by contract to accept the Medicare payment schedule and prohibited by law to balance bill .
CMS , Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services regulate the new qualified health care plans . They also keep an eye onMedicare , Medicaid , the Children 's Health Insurance Program and the Health Insurance Marketplace . Keep in mind if a health insurance policy does not meet all the requirements of the new healthcare refore law then you would still be penalized for nothavinginsurance
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
When yuo speak of being `` medicare certified '' you are usually speaking of the fact that there are two classes of medicare sales people-those that sell medicare selling that is unregulated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services vs. those that do sell Medicare advantage . To be `` medicare certified '' you have to take the AHIP exam -LRB- American Health Insurance Portablity Act -RRB- . It is both time consuming and expensive . This year when I finally completed the certification I had 24 hours invested in just the recertification . Then CMS regulates Medicare Advantage sales people like we are crooks whereas the Medicare Supplement sales people are allowed to go unregulated . I assume you realize you have to have a valid insurance license for theState you reside in .
Medicare CTM stands for Medicare Complaints Tracking Module . It was developed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- as a repository for complaints made about Medicare Part C and Medicare Part D. CTM was developed to capture , track and resolve complaints against Part C and Part D Medicare .
Medicare can cover INR testing once a month when certain conditions are met . Typically you 'll need to consult with your doctor and have them determine if it is medically necessary and confirm with Medicare that the treatment course will be covered -LRB- would fall under Part B - your physician insurance for outpatient procedures -RRB- . Here 's a link to a publication from CMS -LRB- the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- that provides a detailed explanation regarding INR testing , what specific conditions must be met to have it covered , and how Medicare covers it : WEBSITELINK Please note , under Medicare Part B , only 80 % of the expense would be covered by Medicare . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan , it may cover some or all of the other 20 % -LRB- depending on the plan letter you have -RRB- of the service expenses . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement , please feel free to contact me to see about qualifying for one . Medicare Supplement plans are standardized , meaning the benefits are exactly the same regardless of which insurance carrier you have the coverage through -LRB- only the price is different ! -RRB- Even if you already have a Medicare Supplement plan , I can take a quick look to see if a lower monthly premium is available -LRB- takes less than 5 minutes and I may be able to save you a ton of money on your monthly premium -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
CGS Medicare stands for a Celerian Group Company . The company provides a variety of services for Medicare beneficiaries , healthcare providers , and medical equipment suppliers . CSG is a Medicare Administrative Contractor for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- for Medicare Part A , Part B , Home Health and Hospice -LRB- HH&H -RRB- and Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- .
No , Medicare does not pay for Viagra in Medicare Part B or Part D. Erectile dysfunction drugs such as Viagra or Levitra are not considered medically necessary by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , and thus are not covered by Medicare . There are some drug discount plans that will provide discount on those drugs , but not through Medicare plans .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How To File A Renters Insurance Claim ?
It is very easy to file a renter 's insurance claim . You should call/contact the broker/agent that is servicing your policy . If you do not know who it is , then call the insurer directly . You will be asked some questions regarding the items that were damaged , stolen etc. . . so be prepared to provide information . If it is a liability claim , more extensive information may be needed .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
In order to file a claim on your renters insurance you simply need to call the company you have the insurance with . No different then filing an auto insurance claim . The insurance carrier that you have your renters insurance with will take the information and assign a claim adjuster to work with you on your particular claim .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Great question ! The damage should be covered , but if it costs less to fix it than your deductible is , you may be better off not filing a claim . For example , let 's say the damage to repair your window is $ 200 . Your deductible is $ 500 . Your insurance is only going to pay anything over the $ 500 mark , so you will end up paying for the window regardless . It may not make sense to file a claim , pay for the window yourself , and then watch your rate go up . If you have renters insurance , and the car was in your apartment parking lot , there may be coverage there , depending upon the terms of your renters insurance . If you did not file a police report , I 'd recommend that you do , it will help you if you ever need documentation of damage and help collect on your claim . If you need help , feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
I am not aware of any way for an individual to file a claim with Medicare . Medicare requires medical providers to file claims directly on your behalf and do so on a timely basis . Claims are filed electronically , adjudicated by Medicare , and then Medicare files your approved claim with your Medigap carrier via crossover .
There are 2 ways to file a claim you can contact the carrier claim number that is listed on your policy or you can contact your agent that wrote your policy . I Always instruct our clients to contact us 1st that way we can document your file and make sure that your claim has been process right away and filed correctly . having to file a claim is stressful enough a good agent should be able to guide you through the process
Claim history is a big factor for insurance companies but just because you have a claim does n't mean your rate is going to increase . Several factors are used to determine a rate including the length of time you have been with an insurance company , credit , type of claim filed , amount of claim , castropheclaimsect . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover `` sudden and accidental '' losses . It is not a maintenance policy and you do not want to file small claims . Filing frequent , small claims will cause your rateto increase or your policy may be cancelled .
If it is the Insured person and Policy Owner who has the claims against them , and they die and leave the life insurance proceeds to a beneficiary , the beneficiary does not have to pay the claims of the Insured unless they co-signed for that debt . If there is no beneficiary and the life insurance money ends up in the estate , creditor claims can be filed during probate . If it is the beneficiary who has the claims against them , it depends on the state of residence as to whether a claim can be filed against the beneficiary 's life insurance proceeds , and/or how much of the death benefit is subject to creditor claims .
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
In most cases , you do not need to file a claim to Medicare , as doctors/hospitals are required to file these claims for you in a timely manner for Medicare-covered services and supplies . If , however , your doctor has not filed a claim , you can contact them and ask them to do so or call Medicare at 1-800-MEDICARE . If it is close to the time limit -LRB- 12 months -RRB- and your doctor has not filed the claim , you can do so using Medicare 's Patient Request for Medicare Payment Form -LRB- CMS-1490S -RRB- . WEBSITELINK
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
Contacting your agent may not necessarily result in increased premium but reporting a claim might . Your agent is very unlikely to know how much your rates may increase if you were to file a claim . Keep this simple rule in mind : The less claims you file through insurance company the better . You are better off paying a small claim out of pocket . Let the insurance company handle your large claims . Even not at faults and comp claims will have some impact on your rates with most companies .
To submit a claim for bodily injury , property damage or damage to personal property on your renters policy , contact either your agent or the direct number provided by your insurance company . Before you file the claim you should understand that the claim might trigger an increase in future premiums . If the damage is near the deductible you might pay less by not filing the claim . Discuss this with your agent if you have the time . If you are sued , notify the company immediately .
Immediately ! Call your agent or insurer and get started on that process . Claims can take a while to resolve or they can be resolved quickly . If you have a police report or evidence ready to go as soon as you file your claim , it can often get fixed faster . That said , you can usually submit your evidence after the initial filing . I 'm not aware of any company that wo n't let you submit evidence after filing your claim but there are a lot of companies out there . Long-short of it , file as soon as possible .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Do I Need To Know About Buying Life Insurance ?
Some things to know about life insurance are : 1 -RRB- Life insurance prices depend on many factors . Even the amount you can get is dependent on your income and assets . It really helps to have a great agent to help you sort out the options . As someone who has sold thousands of policies over the last decade , I do n't know how people wade through all this information without help . Or why they would want to . 2 -RRB- It is important to look at guarantees . In this economy , my advice would be , wherever you can get a guarantee , take it . 3 -RRB- You have to keep an open mind . If you go in thinking you want a certain type of policy at a certain price , you may find that you do n't even qualify for that type of policy . Your beneficiaries may end up with nothing if you do n't keep an open mind . 4 -RRB- Life insurance pays . Life insurance companies are very secure and nearly all life insurance policies pay the death benefit . 5 -RRB- If you ca n't afford it , you wo n't keep it . If you wo n't keep it , your life insurance wo n't help anyone . So buy affordable life insurance that fits your budget .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
First I 'd like to say that your question , `` Do I need life insurance now that I 'm getting married '' is a mature question that indicates you genuinely care about your future wife and family and are an intelligent thinker ! Good on ya ! The answer to whether you need insurance or not really relies on your financial strength and goals . If you have a few million dollars in liquid assets you probably do n't NEED insurance ... but you may still WANT to have Whole Life , Cash Value life insurance . The wealthiest people in the world typically are the biggest buyers of WL insurance , because of the value it has . On the other hand there are many people who are self insured feeling that the money they have acquired is sufficient to cover the needs of their family in the event of their demise . Obviously those people do n't know what the wealthiest people know about WL insurance . So in order to determine what kind of life insurance you should consider , -LRB- there are over 10 different kinds of life insurance -RRB- , and how much is appropriate , you should consult with a life insurance professional - preferably one who is not tied to just one provider and can help you to implement the program that will be the best for you . If you would like to talk about this further you can call or email me . I 'm only licensed in Hawaii , but I 'm happy to help you with the more important questions .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Nope . Life insurance can not be an investment . Think about this question for a second . What is the most essential element in an investment ? It is time . Some investments need time to mature . Other investments need time to increase in value . Example : if you are invested in the stock market , and your investment decreases in value , what should you do ? Should you sell ? Of course not . You would sustain the loss only if you redeem the shares at a lower price than when you bought them . What you should do is let them ride , and if properly managed , they should recoup their value , and then some . Over time . If you die , then you could pass this investment on to a family member , and that person could continue to manage the fund . It could continue to grow in value . Over time , during his or her lifetime . Does life insurance buy you this kind of time ? Absolutely not . The product is designed in just the opposite way . It assumes you will run out of time tomorrow . You get the biggest bang for the buck when a death benefit is paid immediately . Somebody could conceivably buy a policy today , pay one monthly premium , and then die . The beneficiary would receive the entire survivor benefit . Would you call something an investment if it required no time to realize value ? Nope . Or that is guaranteed to pay out , for that matter ? Lets talk about that guarantee for a second . Of all the forms of insurance you might buy , the only one you know for sure will pay a benefit is life insurance . This is because you know for sure you are going to die . You could buy medical insurance , but never get sick . You could buy disability insurance , but never get hurt . You could buy auto insurance , but never have a car accident . You could buy professional liability insurance , but never get sued . You could buy home insurance , but never have a fire . And on and on . However , if you hold on to that life insurance policy , you know your survivors will get paid . For sure . So , life insurance is a uniquely wonderful risk management tool that requires no time at all to realize value , and is absolutely guaranteed . With these characteristics , it meets nobodys definition of an investment . Now : I am sure you know that certain life insurance products can produce cash value . Whole life , universal life . Even term can carry a return of premium feature . But these funds are not to be considered investments . They should be seen as added value . As ways to partially offset your cost . As an extra benefit . They make the purchase of a policy extra attractive . But you should never assume that they will have time to grow . They will disappear as soon as a claim is filed and a benefit paid . And that could be tomorrow .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
First of all , dont go to websites with life insurance rates . I know everybody likes to do this , but youll never get good information . Why not ? Simply because you need to know the rate class for what you qualify with any given company . How do you really know you qualify for preferred ? Preferred Best ? Standard ? The problem is that the vetting questions used on these websites are never thorough enough to give you a really reliable underwriting classification . Besides , what about all the gray areas that need explanation ? You used to drink heavily , but now you dont . But you stopped only a month ago . Is that long enough to avoid a rated premium ? So what do you do ? You get yourself a broker who will prequalify you . He or she will compile a risk profile about you based on thorough and accurate quote information . He will advocate on your behalf to make sure you receive all the credit you deserve for the risk management and avoidance you are doing . He will present this to selected carriers with a reputation for being competitive for a profile such as yours . Then , when you get numbers from different carriers , they will mean something because you know you really qualify for them .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
You want to find the structure that is going to be the most suitable to meet the needs you want to have covered . There 's a number of factors that you should think about when buying life insurance including : 1 -RRB- Why do you need the coverage ? 2 -RRB- How long do you need it ? 3 -RRB- What risk class do you qualify for ? -LRB- this is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Does the policy provide full coverage -LRB- payout whether death occurs by illness or injury - if you die by illness and you only have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What is the company 's financial rating ? - this is a big point when you 're looking at permanent coverage . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , send me a message - my contact information is provided on my profile . I do not charge fees for my input and can walk you through the entire process of securing a policy .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
You know , there really is a right way to answer this question . I think the right way is to do whats best for you as the beneficiary . Life insurance is , after all , a care package from the insured to his loved one . It is a way of saying , I love you , and I take care of you now . Im going to make sure that an insurance company takes care of you later . This means that the golden rule is this : the quality of life you have now , is the quality of life you should have if you suffer the tragic loss of your spouse . If you are not making do with less now , you should not have to make do with less later . The money you need to pay your monthly bills now , is the amount of money you should have to pay your monthly bills later . The larger question is : for how long do you need this benefit to last ? For how long do you want to live off the insurance money ? There are a number of factors involved in that decision . First , and most important , is buying yourself the time needed to grieve and move on . Think about it . You have dedicated yourself to a life with someone . Now he is not there . And will not return . How long will it tell you to get back on your own two feet and renew your life ? Two years ? Five years ? Longer ? Then , what about your kids ? Theyve already lost one of their parents . Forever . They will need you more than ever . They will need you to spend as much time with them as possible . Can you afford to do this ? Life insurance can make sure the answer is yes .
Yes , more than likely you can , just like you can buy many insurance products on line . There are certainly arguments to be made for buying insurance that way and many major companies are including a `` direct line '' purchase option along with the more traditional distribution of products through a local licensed agency force . I know I myself am a licensed Professional Insurance adviser so I am biased , but it seems to me that we need to focus on what exactly we are buying when we make an insurance purchase . Sure , a policy is a document and a price is charged for what it represents , but i am convinced that most of us buy these things expecting that we 'll never have to use them , Hence the natural inclination to buy the cheapest . My opinion is that there are reasons to start your search on line , but talk to your local Insurance Professional for sound advice before buying anything .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is The Biggest Car Insurance Company In Us ?
The biggest car insurance company in the US is State Farm , followed by Allstate and Berkshire Hathaway Insurance Group . Progressive , Farmers and USAA are also very large companies . In your particular state , you may find other insurers to be more popular ; such as Erie , Travelers or Geico . As experienced brokers , our job is to compare and find the lowest rates available in your area and present you with the best options for your specific vehicles .
Car insurance is regulated by each state 's insurance commissioner . Therefore each company is going to reflect your driving record and how far you drive to work each day and if you use your car in your business and if you have a car that qualifies for discounts due to small engine or if you have the biggest engine and the loudest mufflers in town . Who provides the cheapest car insurance-you do .
Yes , you can get life insurance if you 're overweight . The height/weight profile is one of the biggest factors in the underwriting process - it 's one of the first risk measurements used by insurance companies to determine what risk class the carrier will assign and what rates to charge . The acceptable height/weight range for each risk class can vary substantially from company to company . If you are considered overweight , life insurance companies will want to know the following information to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- What is your current height/weight ? 2 -RRB- Have you gained or lost more than 20 pounds in the past year ? Is your weight stable ? 3 -RRB- Are you a smoker or use tobacco products ? 4 -RRB- Are you being treated for high blood pressure or cholesterol ? 5 -RRB- Have you had any abnormal lab results ? 6 -RRB- Any history of cancer or heart disease in the immediate family before age 60 ? 7 -RRB- Do you have any co-morbid conditions , such as diabetes , heart disease , sleep apnea , tobacco use , etc ? Obesity is a condition which can receive favorable underwriting a few companies may also be able to offer a standard rate even when a table rating would normally apply if you purchase permanent insurance instead of term insurance through a table reduction program . Table ratings require an extra premium compared to a standard rate . An example would be a Table D / Table 4 rate would be approximately two times the standard rate . If you are overweight , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer ! You need the help of and independent life insurance agent that can shop your medical profile informally -LRB- no personal information is revealed to the insurance companies , just a general medical profile -RRB- .
Yes , you can get life insurance if you 're overweight . The height/weight profile is one of the biggest factors in the underwriting process - it 's one of the first risk measurements used by insurance companies to determine what risk class the carrier will assign and what rates to charge . The acceptable height/weight range for each risk class can vary substantially from company to company . If you are considered overweight , life insurance companies will want to know the following information to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- What is your current height/weight ? 2 -RRB- Have you gained or lost more than 20 pounds in the past year ? Is your weight stable ? 3 -RRB- Are you a smoker or use tobacco products ? 4 -RRB- Are you being treated for high blood pressure or cholesterol ? 5 -RRB- Have you had any abnormal lab results ? 6 -RRB- Any history of cancer or heart disease in the immediate family before age 60 ? 7 -RRB- Do you have any co-morbid conditions , such as diabetes , heart disease , sleep apnea , tobacco use , etc ? Obesity is a condition which can receive favorable underwriting a few companies may also be able to offer a standard rate even when a table rating would normally apply if you purchase permanent insurance instead of term insurance through a table reduction program . Table ratings require an extra premium compared to a standard rate . An example would be a Table D / Table 4 rate would be approximately two times the standard rate . If you are overweight , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer ! You need the help of an independent life insurance agent that can shop your medical profile informally -LRB- no personal information is revealed to the insurance companies , just a general medical profile -RRB- . Feel free to send me a message using the `` contact me '' button if you have any other questions .
Currently , the largest US auto insurance company is State Farm , assuming we use written premiums as the criteria . State Farm has offices throughout the US . Following State Farm is Warren Buffet 's Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- Geico and other companies -RRB- , Allstate , Progressive , Farmers and USAA . Of course , these rankings change fairly often . In fact , Berkshire just recently passed Allstate for the Number 2 position . Many local companies in your area may not be the biggest carriers , but still write a lot of local business . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
The biggest life insurance company in the world is Japan Post Insurance Co , Ltd. . It had over a billion dollars of non banking assets in 2010 . The biggest life insurance company in the United States is MetLife . It had over $ 730 million of non banking assets in 2010 .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
There 's no doubt about it . Car insurance for teenage drivers is expensive ! New drivers are 5 times more likely to have an accident . The good news is there are ways to lower your cost without sacrificing coverage . The biggest mistake I see parents make is reducing coverage when they add their son or daughter . If your child has an accident the parents will be sued , not the child . If you are going buy a car for your child buy an older vehicle and stay away from sport cars . A Mustang GT is not a good option for lowering your cost . If you are not going to buy a vehicle and have more drivers than cars , then you can list your child as an `` occasional driver '' . Most companies also offer Good Student Discounts and a discount for completing driver 's education so make sure you inquire about both of these for additional savings .
That is an interesting question ! I guess the biggest difference -LRB- other than health insurance and car insurance being apples and oranges -RRB- is that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- helps pay for your policy if you qualify , and there is no such help with your auto insurance . Auto insurance also is a reactive insurance , generally only used after an event has occurred , while health insurance can be used proactively , utilizing checkups and screenings to prevent the need for a large claim down the road . Thanks for asking !
As Lenny said , the biggest advantage of Term life insurance is it 's relatively low cost -LRB- although this is not always the case -RRB- . Another advantage is that it is a simple product , with few bells and whistles , so less complicated to buy than some permanent policies . It is a good choice for those who need life insurance for a set period of time and do n't care about cash value . The biggest disadvantage of term is that the cost will jump very high after the term ends . Another disadvantage is , if you miss two monthly payments , you will need to qualify medically to get your policy back . Some people find it a disadvantage to have to make regular payments , as you can not pay it off ahead of time , as you can with Universal or Whole Life .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Well , I would say the biggest difference is that ObamaCare is -LRB- supposedly -RRB- about health insurance for human beings -LRB- supposedly U.S. citizens and legal alien residents -RRB- . While auto insurance is about protecting a physical piece of property , your car , and just coincidentally it will probably include some liability coverage and perhaps coverage for medical care resulting from an auto accident . So , unless you are prone to dents and the possible need for a paint job I 'd recommend the health insurance -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- for you if you are a human being . If they finally have produced a car intelligent enough to inquire about its insurance needs -LRB- and these days who can tell ? -RRB- then the machine will probably want to go with the auto insurance .
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
Annuities are some of the safest investments you can get . They are backed by the strength of the Insurance Company that issues the annuity . You would want to make sure that the Insurance Company is rated A or better by rating agencies . The biggest thing to determine is what your goal is for the investment , some offer greater principal growth potentials , others are geared to offer the highest income and still others are designed to offer the a combination of things such as Long Term Care funds as well as Income . At our agency in California , we speak to the person to determine what they are hoping to achieve and then figure out what might help do that best . You 'd want to contact an Independent Agent and do the same .
Geico is primarily an auto insurance company . They would be lumped in with State Farm , Allstate , Farmers , etc. . All of those company WILL sell you life insurance . And they will pay the claim when you die just like all life insurance companies . BUT a wise consumer should always shop thier life insurance with companies that are focused only on life insurance . You will usually find much more attractive choices . Do n't select life insurance by brand name . That 's the biggest mistake you can make and it 's why companies advertise so much . Select by rates and policy features .
There 's many different quality carriers out there that offer life insurance coverage . The biggest factor to determine first is what risk class you qualify for . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines . For example , you may qualify for a preferred risk class from company A , but may only qualify for standard for company B. From there , what type of coverage you need and how much - you want to make sure that you 're comfortable with the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for . You also do n't want to apply to a bunch of different companies at once as this can work against you in many cases . I highly recommend talking to an independent agent who can assist you step-by-step in figuring out which is the best for your specific needs .
This is a little more complicated than it appears on the surface . The biggest determining factor is the use of the building . If the building is still being used for a business , it needs to be covered under a commercial package with property and liability coverage . If it is no longer being used for a business , you could insure it as a home . If it 's a major renovation it would be prudent to add a builder 's risk endorsement to the home policy . if it 's available through that company . This would give coverage for building materials that are on site but not yet installed . If this is the case , the replacement cost would be estimated at the cost when the renovation is finished . If the goal is to save money , my question would be this : do you want to save money in premiums or if there 's a claim ? Insure it correctly , whether it 's commercial coverage or a home . These are small dollars in comparison to what you would lose if it was n't insured correctly . The premiums on a home policy are undoubtedly lower than for a commercial property , but do n't take the chance that your claim is denied because you 're carrying home insurance on a commercial property . Find a good agent you can trust . He or she will be able to speak with the company and get you the coverage you need and , in the long run , save you money .
You could rank companies on a variety of criteria . In the industry , companies are often rated by admitted assets . That means how much money they have . Another way would be the number of policies in force . There are other ways as well . However , whether a company is the biggest , or has the most policies or the highest skyscraper doesnt make any difference when you file a claim . All life insurance companies and the insurance commissioners that regulate them are committed to their ability to pay that death claim when it occurs . That is the reason that you buy life insurance . The death proceeds come in US denominated cash and rarely know which company provided them .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Owners Insurance Cover Pool Damage ?
More than likely not . It would depend on the policy language , the cause of the pool causing the damage and the type of damage caused . This question would be best discussed with one of the claims adjusters of the company that you have the policy thru . As alway read your policy completely to know what is covered or what is excluded or call your local agent and have them explain the coverage and exclusions of the policy .
In short , the answer is yes . But it needs to be clarified whether you are asking for property damage to the pool itself or liability coverage . Both would be covered barring any specific pool exclusions , which I am not aware of any in the standard market . If someone were to get injured while swimming in the pool , yes , your homeowners policy should cover you for liability . Likewise , if you pool is damaged due to the standard homeowners causes of loss less any standard exclusions then the pool would be covered for property damage to the pool itself . Keep in mind that wear and tear would not be covered under your policy . So if your pool liner rips `` just because '' or the concrete foundation cracks , those would be considered wear and tear . Please note that many insurance carriers are very cautious when writing homeowners insurance on homes that have pools . Some do not like to write them with a pool exposure , some do not mind , so be sure to ask your agent how it might affect your current coverage and future coverage and what the premium impact might be . You also want to strongly consider higher liability limits in purchasing an umbrella or if you already have an umbrella policy then higher umbrella limits . It might cost you $ 150 for each additional $ 1 mil limit . Lastly , if you have a pool and want to make sure you are covered for the proper limits , make sure your coverage B -LRB- other structures -RRB- limit is sufficient to cover any losses to your pool and any other structures i.e. detached garages , sheds as well .
Homeowners Insurance does cover Swimming Pools as ` Other Structures ' which is usually 10 % of the Dwelling Coverage amount on the policy . A swimming pool is covered for the same perils that cover the home . The most common covered claim for a swimming pool would be a liability claim or medical payments claim for a slip and fall injury ; some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board or slide in order to avoid this risk . One of the more common questions regarding a swimming pool is coverage for cracks in the pool . Cracks are usually caused by land movement or earthquakes ; this is not covered on a homeowners policy . Earthquake coverage would need to be purchased to cover this sort of damage to a swimming pool ; however , the deductible and special limits will apply to swimming pools . Please review your coverage details prior to purchasing coverage .
A swimming pool is an attractive luxury and may in many ways enhance the sales value of your home , but your insurance company factors it as a possible risk . Homes are insured based on reconstruction value and relative risk to the insuring carrier . A swimming pool can pose a threat to the carrier since there lies the possibility of danger and a personal liability . It is more likely that a child or impaired adult may become injured in or by the pool rather than your home being destroyed by fire . In most cities around the country , there is an ordinance in force requiring homeowners to have swimming pools within a fenced yard protected by a latched gate so not to invite strangers to the use of the pool without the owner 's permission and knowledge ; insurance companies all impose the condition that a swimming pool is in a fenced and gated area without public access . Even though the swimming pool poses a greater liability risk , most insurance carriers do not assess an increase in premium ; however , they will always ask if you have a diving board and/or slide . The diving board and slide pose a much greater risk than the swimming pool itself . Some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board , slide or a trampoline in the yard . For homeowners with a swimming pool , it is highly recommended to carry the highest available personal liability insurance limit ; most likely $ 500,000 , in most States , there is no deductible applicable to the liability portion of the policy and the premium is unlikely to cost more than $ 40 - $ 80 per year for the additional liability insurance coverage . If this topic is of greater concern , you may purchase a Personal Umbrella Policy which in most cases will provide an Excess Form of liability up to $ 5 Million of coverage for a separate premium .
If you have the right type of homeowners coverage , this question would be easier to answer . The right type of homeowners coverage would cover your property , both real property -LRB- your home , garage , built in pools , etc. -RRB- and personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture , dishes , yard fixtures , things you could take with you if you moved -RRB- for damage unless there is a specific exclusion or limitation in the policy that says it doesnt . I dont think you will find a specific exclusion or limitation for a pool leak but you will find one that says damage caused by wear and tear or deterioration , or inherent vice would not be covered . So the issue would be , why did the pool leak ? If the liner simply wore out from age or there was a defect , you probably wont be covered . But if neither of these apply ; you may find coverage for the damage . Unfortunately , most people dont have the right homeowners policy . Their policies limit coverage on personal property -LRB- such as above ground pools -RRB- to specific named perils . I call these the wrong kind of homeowners policies . If you have this type of policy , you must show the insurance company the damage was caused by one of the named perils . A pool leak is not a named peril . Under that type of policy , I think you are going to be out of luck .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
There are some insurance companies that may surcharge for having a pool but generally this is very minimal . What a pool owner needs to consider is do they have enough liability coverage on their policy . Your biggest potential loss as it pertains to a pool is having a liability law suit against you should someone be injured or worse in or around your pool . Being a pool owner myself I carry an umbrella policy as added protection just to make sure in the event of an unfortunate accident I am properly covered .
Does the presence of a Swimming Pool increase Home Insurance Premium ? Swimming Pools that belong to a Single Family Residence and are gated from public entry do not pose any additional hazard to an insurance carrier ; however , it is the insured 's responsibility to disclose the fact that there is a pool . Most carriers inspect each and every dwelling and will insist that there is no public access to the pool and the area is protected by a latched gate . There may however exist an additional hazard associated with the swimming pool , the presence of a Diving Board or a Slide . Each carrier hasits own independent assessment on underwriting the risk ; there are some carriers that will notaccept a homewith the presence of a diving board orslide ; also , there are some carriers that will accept a slide only if it is an in-ground slide for example built in a rockery type area sliding into the pool . This whole topic is focused on thehazard that exists for the risk at hand . Although , a pool will not generate a higher premium , the circumstance may make the home ineligible for insurance with various carriers .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
I am not quite sure what you are asking here , so I will try and answer two questions . First , renters insurance will not cover any direct physical damage to an above ground pool caused by the common perils . Second , it will cover physical damage to the pool caused by your negligence . An example of this could be you leave numerous pressurized containers in your rented space , which , due to the summer heat , explode and damage the pool . So , no all perils damage , but you can get coverage for your negligence .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
Property insurance is based upon the concept of shared risk . That means that the chances of experiencing a fire that would destroy your home are really low , however , if that were to occur the loss would be quite high . Others property owners face a similar dilemma . If you could share your risk with others you would pay a small amount to avoid losing a large amount . When risk is shared it is considered a pool . Insurance companies form pools and allow people to share the risk of a large loss in exchange for a small loss , the property insurance premium . The amount of this insurance premium is determined by professionals known as actuaries who compare the loss history of millions of pieces of property to develop statistical probabilities of loss for a certain defined piece of property . Additionally they compute the probabilities of different pieces of property and calculate a premium for those losses as well . If you have a home in the forest and I have exactly the same home but live in a suburb the chances are greater that you would experience a catastrophic loss than that I would . This difference is developed mathematically by reviewing millions of losses over a long period of time . As a result we can both be in the same pool but you would pay more than me because you represent a greater risk to the pool . In order to be permitted to do business in your state the insurance commissioner of your state must approve the premiums charged by your insurance company . The commissioners chief concern is that the insurance company is able to meet the promises that it makes . Comparing the losses sustained over time with the premium income of the company helps the commissioner determine the ability of the company to keep its promises -LRB- even in very trying times . -RRB- This then develops into the premium that the company charges you for coverage . It is based on statistics and the companys experience and represents your share of the cost of insuring a pool of risks so that there is sufficient money to take care of a catastrophic loss or anything in between .
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
Combined single limit is essentially a pool of money from which liability claims are paid . For example , if someone with a policy that has a combined single limit is in an accident with multiple people and the individual with the combined single limit policy is at fault and pursued legally for damages , any damages rewarded are paid out of the total pool . So , if the combined single limit is $ 500,000 , then damages will be paid from this $ 500,000 pool and no damages rewarded above $ 500,000 will be covered by the policy .
If a pool is damaged due to a covered peril there may be coverage . For example a tree falls on the pool . It will also cover liability if someone gets hurt or drowns in or around the pool . Make sure your agent knows you have a pool and make sure it is properly fenced according to the insurance companies standards however . If you do n't and the company inspects it , you may face non-renewal . Most companies require some type of fence around a pool .
Without having a crystal ball , it 's impossible to know how much of any type of insurance you should have.Obviously , the more , the better . With Long Term Care , you buy a total pool of money and you pick the maximum amount PER DAY that will be paid from the pool of money . So again , the larger that pool is , the better . There are lots of statistics out there , but the main thing is that it must be affordable so you keep it over the long haul . A good average figure might be in the $ 200,000 range -LRB- pool of money -RRB- and $ 200/day . That amount would cover many situations including an average nursing home . However , most claims occur in YOUR home since most people want to stay in their home . So if the above is unaffordable , buy as much as you can . You may only need $ 80 for home health care . Something is always better than nothing - and this is especially true with Long Term Care .
Homeowners insurance really does not go up with a pool although some carriers may have a small surcharge . What you want to look at however is liability coverage . You may want to increase your liability limits since your liability exposure increases with a pool . Such as a slip and fall or worse . A pool itself will fall under your other structure coverage . I suggest to consult your agent to see if you have enough coverage . Usually the pool is less likely to suffer damages , however your pumps and filters , heater you would want to make sure are covered .
The perils covered under a homeowners policy are stated in the policy . The most likely damage to a pool would be earth movement . Earth movement is excluded in most homeowners policies . It is conceivable that the pool could be damaged by a covered peril . Contact your agent if you have a specific question about pool coverage .
Companies have differing eligibility guidelines when it comes to pools . Most will notadd a surchargeto the liability premium for the pool -LRB- though some do -RRB- as long as the pool meets the company ` seligibility guidelines.A fence surrounding the pool that includes a self-latching gate is a must for basically all companies . Even with that , some carriers will still only write the pool if it does not have a diving board or slide . Some carriers are OK with the diving board but not the slide , and vice versa . Some have a height limitforthe board and/or slide . All this to say , it is to your advantage to have several different carriers quote the homeowners insurance once the pool is added . Your current carrier may no longer be the best option .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Do Smokers Pay More For Life Insurance ?
Smokers , and other forms of tobacco use , are detrimental to your health . It is not unusual for long term smokers to develop cancer of the lungs , mouth or throat . Many develop emphysema or COPD . Any of these conditions will shorten your lifespan . If the insurance carrier believes your tobacco habit will cause you to die sooner than `` normal '' they will charge a higher rate to compensate for the additional risk .
Life insurance is a mortality insurance product . It bases its underwriting offer on life expectancy and prices it accordingly . Smoking shortens life expectancy and can be a contributing cause or indirect component to our respiratory disease or conditions . Because of these facts , actuarial pricing charges more for the risk the life insurance company takes on .
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
Since life insurance rates will depend on several factors such as face amount , type of policy , your overall health and insurability profile , etc , the real question is how much MORE does life insurance cost for a smoker . Most companies differentiate between different types of tobacco use . An occasional cigar smoker may get a better rate than a cigarette smoker . A cigarette smoker could expect to pay 30 % to 50 % more in premiums depending on their age than a non-tabacco user .
Great question . Smokers usally pay more on life insurance about % 20 - % 50 more . Keep in mind not all companies have the same rates . Some companies charge more for smokers and some companies have good rates for that type of class . They will also ask how many do you smoke a day the less per day you migh get a preferred smoker rate .
The cost of life insurance for a smoker varies with age , gender and build , just as it does for life insurance for a nonsmoker . However , when you throw in a health condition , being a smoker can increase premiums much more than it does for a nonsmoker . Smoking while having diabetes , heart disease , COPD , even osteoporosis , can cause rates to jump exponentially , or even be declined . One way to get around this can be to purchase a simplified issue life insurance policy . Their smoker rates tend to not have quite as large a variation as medically underwritten policies , and they may not be as strict about the impact of smoking upon that health condition . There are also medically underwritten policies that treat smokers much better than others . Contact an agency that specializes in smoker life insurance to get your most competitive rate .
This will depend on a number of factors , but for a given age , gender , and risk class - the premiums for a smoker will be roughly about 50 % more than non-smoker rates -LRB- can be higher , varies by carrier -RRB- . Some carriers may offer non-smoker rates to tobacco users depending on the type of tobacco and frequency of usage . The types of tobacco that carriers may consider for non-smoker rates are cigars , pipe smokers , and chewing tobacco - if you 're using cigarettes , you 're going to get smoker rates . To get a realistic projection of cost , you will want to review your height/weight and medical history with an independent agent to identify the risk class you 're most likely to qualify for -LRB- this determines the premiums for the program -RRB- , the age of the proposed insured -LRB- PI -RRB- , whether you 're male or female , a tobacco user or not , amount of coverage you want to secure/need , and how long you want to have the coverage in place for .
Usually , most policies require a quick medical exam , which includes a urine sample . And they will test for pot . The good news is that most companies will not decline you coverage . They will just consider you a `` Smoker '' and give you smoker rates . But , currently , I know of 3 companies that offer `` Non-Smoker '' rates to pot smokers . Aviva is the most relaxed about it . And will allow up to a `` Preferred '' non-smoker rating for using 2 times per week or less . Lincoln National is next and will give Standard Non-Smoker ratings to people who smoke 2 times per week or less . MetLife allows for 1 time per week and will offer a Standard nonsmoker rating . Prudential allows for 2 times per month , and offers a Standard nonsmoker rating . Long story short if you smoke Pot , Aviva or Lincoln National will be your best bets . And this list is as of 3/2013 , it could easily change .
Rates are n't that bad . But why not quit smoking ? 6 months off tobacco will save you loads of $ $ $ . For a 40 year old male , the very best rates we can get for you is : 20 Year , Non-Smoker $ 500K coverage $ 29.41 / month $ 340.00 / year 20 Year Smoker $ 500K coverage $ 125.43 / month $ 1,450.00 / year Not only do you save money if you do n't smoke . But the odds are you will outlive your life insurance , which should be your number one goal for your family .
Unfortunately , that is too broad a question to give a specific answer . I can however , point you in the right direction . Smoking status is just one factor in assessing risks and setting rates . Smokers usually will pay more than non-smokers . The reason for the word usually , as opposed to definitely , is that in Canada some companies approach smoking differently . In other words , they charge smokers different rates based on what and how much they smoke . For example , cigar smokers are generally permitted to smoke 1 cigar a month with many companies to still be considered `` non-smokers '' for insurance purposes . I suspect it is for purely competitive reasons for cigar-smoking golfers . However , a more realistic approach is allowing 50 cigars a year which some companies take . I suggest that you look at the online quoting services to get an idea and then work with a local independent agent / broker to get the right policy at the right price . It is very important that you are truthful when declaring your smoking status as the company can deny your claim if you are not . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Fully underwritten life insurance policies require you to declare whether or not you use any tobacco products . Although cigars and pipes are smoked , the question seems to suggest cigarettes . Cigarette smoking shortens life expectancy , so smokers pay more for life insurance . If smoking is declared on the application and the life insurance company offers an underwriting decision after the due diligence process , a death claim will be paid . If the insured takes up smoking after the policy has been issued as a nonsmoker , the life insurance company will pay the claim . It is the circumvention of truth that may indeed be classified as fraud that could void the policy in certain states or reduce the death benefit based on smoker rates at the date of issue . Some occasional smokers attempt to beat the urine analysis detection of cotinine , the byproduct of nicotine , by not smoking 8-10 days before the exam banking on their body chemistry to purge the continine from their systems . But you would have to lie on the application . And again , lying on the application could be considered fraud in some states . My advice : There is one life insurance company that offers nonsmoking rates to smokers for three years in an attempt to give the insured time to quit smoking . We can help with that . But bottom line : do n't try to game the system .
Insurance companies tend to assign policyholders into a risk group - high risk , low risk , average risk , etc. . Life insurance companies really have only two risk classes : standard and preferred . Within these classes you can have subclasses : standard smoker . Standard non-smoker . Preferred smoker . Preferred non-smoker . And you can have preferred best and standard best subclasses as well . Table ratings are typically assessed on top of the standard underwriting class . The rating means that you basically are considered a standard risk , but due to one or more other factors , your risk is higher than the average standard risk . Insurance companies vary in how they weigh each table , but typically , each table represents a 25 % increase in price over standard . So , if your standard premium is $ 1000 per year , a table A rating would make that premium $ 1250 . A table B rating would make that premium $ 1500 . And so on . I have seen carriers assist table ratings for all types of reasons . These include a high PSA ; history of heart attack ; build ; alcohol history ; driving record ; mountain climbing ; prior drug use ; cancer history ; scuba diving ; aviation ; foreign travel . Basically , you could take a look at every one of the questions on your insurance application , and depending on your answer , an insurance carrier may want to assess extra premium . On the overall , I think that system works in favor of the consumer . You are still able to get coverage . The system is much better than a black or white , take-you-or - leave - you set up . In addition , I think that by and large these extra premiums are assessed fairly . Obviously , the broker needs to hook you up with the carrier that will most aggressively apply its underwriting guidelines in your case . One carrier may only assess a table B , but another one might be a table G ! Still another one might decline you altogether . Your broker needs to be your guide in fending your way through the life insurance carrier jungle out there :-RRB- One other important note here : carriers sometimes have sales on policies through what are called table shaving discounts . This means that for certain types of cases , for a set period of time only , they will make an offer of standard to somebody who normally would be assessed a table rating . They usually cap it at table D or so . And they usually limit it to only permanent insurance such as universal life . Sales like this can give consumers really good bargains . Basically , you could buy a permanent product for a lower cost than a term product simply because the underwriting concessions wouldnt be available on the term product . I would also like to add that carriers typically go up to table L or so . When I have a client who represents a very high risk due to a serious medical condition or dangerous hobby , I like to see how high I can get a carrier to go with a table rating . I mean , if somebody really needs the coverage and has the money to pay for it , why not put hit with the premium to make it worth your while ? Its fun to see how hungry carriers can be for somebodys business :-RRB- .
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
Yes , you can smoke weed -LRB- marijuana -RRB- and get life insurance as long as you do not have a history of substance abuse . You will most likely have to pay smoker rates , just as a social cigarette smoker would pay , but they can be as good as Preferred Smoker premiums if your health is good and you do not overindulge .
There are several ways that a life insurance company can know or learn that you smoke -LRB- what you smoke was not specified but we 'll go for tobacco on this one -RRB- . 1 -RRB- Self Reporting - they ask you on your application if you are a tobacco user and , depending upon the value of the policy being applied for , may ask for fairly detailed information on your type and frequency of tobacco usage . So , to honestly complete the initial application the applicant themselves should be the person informing the insurance carrier about their tobacco use status . 2 -RRB- Physical Exam - as a condition of your application you may be required to get a basic physical examination where things like height & weight can be verified and where , quite often , blood and/or urine samples are also taken to screen for health issues and to detect drugs such as Nicotine in the applicant 's system . 3 -RRB- Electronic Medical Records - most life insurance carriers will check your application 's answers against information about you in the Medical Information Bureau . An indicated history of tobacco use when none is reported on the person 's application would be an underwriting red flag . Also , information about whether you have been issued life insurance as a smoker , declined or rated as a smoker on a life insurance application can also turn up . 4 -RRB- Leg Work - few of us will have this problem , but if you are applying for a really large amount of life insurance the insurance carriers may actually conduct investigations into an applicant 's background and medical history . These may include interviews with friends and family . So , if they figure out you are really a Mafia boss rather than the president of the local trash company , your application for $ 50 million in coverage may get turned down . To take out a life insurance policy as a non-smoker when you really are a smoker would be an act of fraud -LRB- a misrepresentation on the applicant 's part -RRB- . And even if you were to get issued at a non-smoker 's rates that does n't mean you are home free . Life insurance policies standardly have a two year contestability provision in them where the insurance company can terminate or adjust the policy if it can prove that you made any false statements on your application . But , if your misrepresentation about your tobacco use is determined to meet the legal requirements of fraud -LRB- pretty good chance they will -RRB- then the contestability period is indefinite .
The short answer : Much more expensive than if you did n't ! Rates for smokers tend to be twice -LRB- or more -RRB- as expensive as rates for non-smokers . Some life insurance companies are better suited to smokers than others , so keep this in mind if you are shopping for a policy . An independent agent who has access to a wide variety of carriers can find you the best rates for your particular situation .
Smokers are considered a health risk and unfortunately will always pay a higher premium . The serious health conditions that are associated with smoking means smokers have a shorter life expectancy . If one is a smoker the best course of action would be to seek some type of smoking cessation program . One small word of advice ; if your option is the electronic cigarette this will show up in the para-meds as nicotine usage . In some cases it will afford you a lower premium however your rating class with most insurance companies will be listed as smoker .
You can easily get life insurance coverage but most companies will classify the premiums as a smoker . There are however more than few companies that will provide non smoker rates based on frequency . In order to work with the carrier to get the non smoker rates it is important to have your marijuana legally prescribed .
When you take an exam for a life insurance policy , one of the common tests they conduct is a urine test . Each company tests for a set of markers -LRB- the exact markers may vary by carrier -RRB- , but each of them check for nicotine - the presence of nicotine indicates to the carrier the use of tobacco products . The type of tobacco product being used does matter though - a couple of carriers will offer a non-smoker rate -LRB- saving you thousands of dollars over the life of a policy , regardless of term or permanent insurance -RRB- if you only use cigars or chewing tobacco -LRB- some smokeless tobacco -RRB- , and not cigarettes . Prudential is known as somewhat of a `` go to '' company in the agent circles for people who only use the aforementioned types of tobacco . Cigarettes are considered smoker status across the board for underwriting purposes . Please note , when completing an application -LRB- even for a non-medical product -RRB- and falsify information -LRB- e.g. saying you do n't smoke and it 's discovered that you do -RRB- , the carrier can rescind the policy - it 's important to be honest with the carrier so you do n't run the risk of losing your coverage . Most carriers will require at least a 12 month period from the point of the last use of tobacco before considering non-smoker risk classes .
Health insurance is more expensive for smokers . In fact , under the Affordable Healthcare Act -LRB- aka Obama Care -RRB- , it is one of only three factors considered in calculating the monthly premium - geographic area in which you live , your age and tobacco usage -LRB- Y/N -RRB- . As a smoker , the new law will allow insurance companies to increase monthly premiums to a maximum of 50 % higher than a non smoker .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Can You Cash Out Your 401K ?
Your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is established by your employer . There is a document that states what you may do with the funds in the separate accounts . The document will tell you at what point the contributions by the employer become yours . The document might provide opportunity to withdraw some of the funds for specific purposes . The plans permission to withdraw doesnt diminish your responsibility to pay tax on the money withdrawn including penalties if you are less than 50.5 years old .
That is a great question ! You can , but the question is do you really want to ? In many cases , you will lose a substantial amount of the funds ' value by doing so , either through loss of unvested contributions , penalties , or from the income tax that is assessed . Those losses can be really steep , up to a third of the value of your fund . If you need to get your hands on some fast cash , try borrowing from your life insurance , or selling something before gutting your future , ok ? Please drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
A Roth 401k would be funded with `` after tax '' dollars . Your earnings would have already had taxes deducted prior to funding your Roth 401k . The advantage of a Roth -LRB- vs. traditional 401k -RRB- is your account grows and distributes tax free as long as your contributions have been invested for at least 5 years and you are at least 591/2 when distributions begin . A traditional 401k is funded from `` pre-tax '' dollars . Your take home pay will be higher , but you will pay taxes on the money you take out during retirement at what ever your tax rate is at that time . Most people do not have the same level of deductions during their retirement years so you will need to look at your own situation to determine whether a pre-tax or post-tax 401k is best for you . One thing is for sure , if you can afford to pay the taxes now while you are putting money into your Roth 401k , you 'll be thrilled when you pull money out during retirement tax free .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
That is a great question ! If you can afford to contribute to both your Roth IRA and your 401k , then by all means do so ! What a great way to provide for your retirement . You can contribute $ 5500 per year -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- to your Roth , and $ 17,500 in your 401k . Ideally , you contribute the max to your 401k , especially if your employer matches , and then fund your Roth , to ensure that you have some tax free income to balance the taxed income from the 401k . What a great question ! Thanks for asking !
Does a 401k count as a retirement plan ? Yes , a 401k would be considered a qualified retirement plan . 401k plans were originally created to be a supplement to traditional pension plans in the 1980s but rather quickly 401k plans actually began to replace traditional retirement plans as 401k plans presented an opportunity for employers to shift liability to employees in regard to their retirement . Retirement went away from an employer 's responsibility to an employees .
A 401K and a Roth IRA are quite different . The 401K plan is employer sponsored and may include matching funds from the employer . The limits to how much can be placed in the 401K are much higher . The amount you put into the 401K is untaxed income but fully taxed when the plan starts making distributions . All distributions incur income tax , and early distributions could be subject to a tax penalty . The Roth IRA is an individual plan that is restricted to people whose income is below a prescribed level . The contributions to the plan are made with after tax dollars ; however , the distribution at retirement is income tax free . Some companies do offer a Roth 401K , which is a marriage of the two plans . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but distributions are income tax free when received after age 59.5 .
Why roll over a 401k into a Roth IRA ? Well I ca n't honestly think of a good answer to do this . In order to do this transfer , if you qualify for a Roth in the first place , would require you to cash out your 401k and combined with your current income , might place you in a higher tax bracket , as well as the extra 10 % penalty for early redemption , and possible redemption fees from the 401k as well . So you might be looking at a `` loss '' of anywhere from 35-45 % of the value of your 401k just from taxes and early redemption penalties . What you would have to figure is how many years would it take you to get back to even ? That would include this loss and the loss of gain years spent getting back to even . How about if you qualify , owning both ? Use new money for your Roth . Yes , it will be taxed , but it wo n't be taxed , penalized and require years to recover the market loss . Have both .
A profit sharing plan falls under IRS section 401 . Both a profit sharing plan and 401k are forms of retirement plans that allow employees to make pre-tax contributions to an account where contributions and earnings are not taxed until they are pulled out during the distribution phase . It is important to note that a profit sharing plan does not have to be part of a retirement plan . A profit sharing plan typically allows the employer to decide from year-to-year whether to contribute on behalf of participants . It would make sense that this decision follows the company 's profitability for the previous year . While there are variations of both types of retirement plans , there are many similarities between profit sharing plans and 401k 's such as the ability to take out a loan or pull money out based on a narrow definition of hardship . Both can have non-elective employer contributions . An employer can offer both a profit sharing plan and a 401k . You might find this link to an IRS publication helpful regarding profit sharing plans . WEBSITELINK
Can you get your 401k now ? In most cases the answer is yes , but the question is should you ? Cashing in your 401k plan prior to age 591/2 -LRB- unless you take a series of annuity like payments -RRB- subjects you to a 10 % penalty along with making any funds taxable as income . The other thing to think about with a question like this is if you cash out your retirement early , what will you have later ?
That is an excellent question ! Yes , if you can afford to contribute to both accounts , absolutely ! If your employer matches your 401k contribution , you want to keep that company match , it 's free money . If you can keep your contribution level there , and still make your $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- contribution to your Roth , great ! If not , you might wantto think about starting off with the 401k account , getting the match , switch to the Roth until it 's maxed , then switch back to the 401k until you reach the max there . Talk to your financial advisor and figure out what will work best for you . If you need help , feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
What kind of retirement plan is a 401k ? It is a defined contribution retirement plan . Created in the early 1980 's as a supplement to traditional defined benefit retirement plans , 401k plans quickly went from supplemental to primary retirement plans in the USA . The performance good or bad in a 401k is almost entirely the responsibility of the employee . 401k plans represent a major shift in responsibility for plan outcomes to employees .
That is a great question ! Simply put , a 401k rollover is what you call the action of taking the funds from one 401k and moving them -LRB- or `` rolling them over '' -RRB- into another 401k fund , or similar retirement vehicle . This has to be done in a very timely fashion , or there are tax consequences , and is most commonly done when you switch employers , and want to keep funding the 401k . Thanks for asking !
Can a part time employee qualify for a 401k ? Going to depend entirely on the employer as the IRS spells out the guidelines as to what an employer ca n't do , they leave a lot of room for an employer to decide what they can do . That said , it would be an exceptional employer who would offer 401k benefits to a part time employee as there is a cost per head to the employer for offering a 401k .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
Most people would want to wait until they are at least 591/2 years old to withdraw money from their 401k because that is the age when penalty free withdrawals can be taken . You can take withdrawals earlier , but there will be a 10 % penalty for early withdrawal . There are exceptions to the 591/2 age requirement : You become totally and permanently disabled . You terminate employment through permanent layoff , termination , quitting or taking early retirement in the year you turn 55 , or later . Pay for medical care up to the amount allowable as a medical expense deduction in the same year as the medical expense was incurred . Your withdrawal is a response to a qualified domestic relations order . You are required to begin 401k withdrawals by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn 701/2 . Regardless of when you take your withdrawal from your 401k , the amount you take out will be taxed as ordinary income for that tax year . You should always seek out a qualified financial professional for help in these situations prior to taking action .
That is a great question ! There are some good reasons for borrowing from your 401k , and some bad ones . The good reasons are that they are typically fairly easy to get , and often at much lower interest rates than a commercial lender would give . And depending upon the structure of your 401k , in some cases , the interest that you pay is to yourself , so there is less loss on the loan itself . The bad reasons are worth considering . The worst is what happens if you are let go , or leave the job before the loan is paid off . In many cases the loan has to be repaid within a short period of time , may have serious tax consequences , and that 's not even considering what the withdrawal of the funds may do to the earnings power of your 401k if it 's not structured correctly . The best thing to do is speak with your plan administrator , or HR person , and find out the details of taking out a loan and what the terms are . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is The Best Health Insurance For Small Business Owners ?
The best health insurance for small business owners will vary , depending on many factors . Finding the best rates and coverages are the first step and utilizing an experienced health insurance broker is critical . For example , my 33 years of experience in the business helps customers save thousands of dollars . The type of business you have , number of employees , where you live and claims experience are just some of the factors that will influence the cost .
Group health insurance works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan Group health insurance is health insurance a business owns and offers to its employees . The business generally pays for a percentage of the premiums with the employees paying the rest . It 's often offered as a means of attracting people to come work from them . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , I recommend contacting an experienced broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . Having too many `` hands in the cookie jar '' can sometimes make things confusing . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
No , statistically around 99 % large companies in the US -LRB- 200 + employees -RRB- offer health benefits , about 96 % of medium companies -LRB- 50-199 employees -RRB- offer health benefits , and about 92 % of small companies -LRB- < 49 employees -RRB- offer health benefits . There may be a significant impact on the small employer statistics as state and federal exchanges become available . However I can confidently say that any such statistical shift in the small employer health benefits market will most likely be a short term -LRB- perhaps 3-5 year -RRB- variation that will in time reflect a very small impact in the % of small businesses offering health benefits . The complex structuring options and technical details will render the small business exchanges as effective at delivering optimal results as online tax software is in helping someone who is not well versed in accounting manage pay-roll and state/federal tax obligations/deductions . Also the businesses who do not provide meaningful benefit programs to their employees will find it hard to compete with the other companies who are able to leverage such programs to provide them with a distinct competitive advantage . That being said the exchanges will revolutionize the marketplace of individual health insurance policies .
Disability overhead insurance is coverage for a small business owner , to reimburse for his or her monthly business overhead expenses in the event of a disability . A simple example would include money to pay for the rent of the owner 's business location if that person were sick or hurt and could not work . Other monthly expenses are also eligible to be covered . This insurance can take a great burden off the business owner . otherwise these overhead expenses would have to be paid out of savings or other personal assets . The premise is that if the owner is disabled , business revenue will shrink or disappear , thus making it difficult or impossible to have the cash to pay the overhead expenses . Best to consult a local insurance professional for a complete analysis of the situation .
Due to how fluid and dynamic the small business world is you will never be able to get a perfectly accurate figure on how many small businesses offer health insurance to their employees . However , studies over the last few years have show a slow but steady decline in the percentage of small businesses who offer group health insurance to their employees . In 2013 we witnessed the first time that the estimated percentage of small businesses offering group health insurance fell below the 50 % level , coming in at a little over 49 % . It is projected that this level will decrease somewhat further -LRB- probably mid-40 % range -RRB- when 2014 statistics can be compiled .
Disability buy-out policies -LRB- also called buy-sell policies -RRB- help small business that have partners or more than one owner . It helps a company stay operating in the event that one of the owners becomes disabled from a sickness or injury . The policy gives cash to one owner to purchase the disabled owners share of the business . Basically , the disabled partner will receive his value of the business and the business can still function and remain stable .
what does Simple retirement plan mean ? It means that someone is using a boilerplate retirement plan created by the IRS to provide a retirement program for a small business . I love Simples as their name says it all . A Simple is a straight forward plan design with only a few requirements to comply with to have the plan . The best part for a small business owner is it costs next to nothing to provide . There is no testing of the plan which costs money . Just a nominal per head fee of active participants . The employer does n't pay fees for testing employees and accounting for employees who are n't in the plan . For a small business a Simple is a great choice for putting a retirement plan together for employees .
Which retirement plan is best for small business ? Personally , I like the SIMPLE retirement plan for use with small business . Why ? because it 's SIMPLE ! This IRS created plan is one of the most inexpensive plans out there for a small business . For the business owner the rules are simple and clear . NO testing , no ERISA planmath nonsense , no per head fees for all employees -LRB- including those that do n't participate -RRB- , in other words if you follow the IRS guidelines you save about $ 3k to $ 5k a year in administration fees . A simple involves matching -LRB- 3 % a minimum of 3 out of every 5 years or 1 % for those two years -RRB- employees who participate in the plan . While this may seem like a lot of moneyfor amatch . Think of it this way . You are rewarding your employees who stay with you , rather than a bunch of guys downtown who administer plans . Look closer into these retirement plans . They are easy to establish , easy to administer and extremely inexpensive to run .
Small business is generally defined as fewer than 50 full time employees . That is also the definition used by Obamacare . Small business owners are generally required to pay at least 50 % of the employee premium . Small businesses are also required to have at least 70 % of eligible employees covered under the group health plan . If the small business fails to meet participation standards , the business owner will need to increase their contribution to the cost of coverage to increase participation .
Self-employed health insurance can be very affordable , if you shop the right way . A big mistake made by small business owners is that they either incorrectly calculate their federal subsidy , or choose a policy that appears to very inexpensive , but ultimately becomes extremely expensive because of higher-than anticipated premiums and high out-of-pocket costs that were not initially understood or explained . An experienced broker can review all Exchange plans -LRB- Platinum , Gold , Silver , Bronze , and Catastrophic -RRB- , determine the correct subsidy , explain Health Savings Accounts -LRB- HSAs -RRB- and determine if they the tax benefits and low premiums would be beneficial . Also , accurate calculation of the federal subsidy is critical , and it 's important that a broker offer his/her expertise so you do n't owe an unexpected tax bill in the Spring . The ACA Legislation has changed the scope of US healthcare , and professional expert and unbiased guidance is always recommended . And each year , new plans and carriers become available on state and federal Marketplaces . The SHOP Marketplace is also available for small business owners . IMPORTANT : This question was answered by Edward Harris , one of the premier health insurance brokers in the US , and owner of majormedicalhealth.com , which provided free online quotes and the lowest rates from top-rated companies .
One example of key person life insurance would be to guarantee a quick and easy sale of the business upon the owner 's death . For example If the owner has a wife and children that are not active in the business and would have no idea how to run it , they would probably sell it in a distressed manner if the owner died unexpectedly . If he has a key manager that would be the likely person to sell it to they can purchase a life insurance policy on the owner 's life with the key man as the policy owner . The business can bonus the money to pay the premium to the key man . An attorney will write up a buy-sell agreement and the if the owner dies , his manager has the money and an agreed on price to buy the business from the widow . This makes the transition much easier for the widow PLUS has the benefit of keeping your key employee from straying off and being attracted to greener pastures . When there are multiple business owners , they each need a life policy on each other plus a legal agreement so they can buy out the spouse 's interests if one of them dies . They do n't want a business partner just because she/he happened to be married to their former business partner .
There are still too many variables to provide you a definitive answer . The state or states your workforce is located in , the size of your small business -LRB- less than 50 or greater than 50 employees ? -RRB- , the ages of your employees/spouses/dependent children to be covered , the number of dependent children to be covered , perhaps tobacco usage , plus factors such as health plan design all vary from group to group but are critical features defining fully insured health insurance rates in ObamaCare compliant plan designs . Speaking in very generic terms based upon marketplace quoting as of July 2014 , I would estimate unit cost ranges for small group plans -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- on a composite rated basis to generally fall within the following ranges : Employee Only : $ 250 to $ 425 Median : $ 325 Spousal Unit : $ 280 to $ 500 Median : $ 395 Per Child Unit -LRB- 3 max -RRB- $ 85 to $ 175Median : $ 120 -LRB- Note : dependent children age 21 to 26 charged separate young adult rate -RRB- This is based onno exhaustive analysis , just from what I have seen and gathered from my peers here in the mid-south . If someone were to give me the vague `` what would health insurance costs be for my small business '' questionto dosome business cost projections these would be reasonable ranges to expect to work within and approximate average costs per covered unit to experience at this time .
This remains an area of great confusion to many small business owners . If you have less than 50 employees the answer is `` No '' . The employer mandate provision of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 100 or more full time employees beginning in 2015 and for employers with 50 to 99 full time employees in 2016 . Please note that when I use the term full time employees this means employees who work 30 + hours per week and also includes what are referred to as full time equivalent employees -LRB- FTEs -RRB- . FTEs are part time employees whose work hours are totaled up according to IRS approved calculations that are then translated into some number of full time employees to be added to the employer 's regular full time employee count to arrive at a total employment figure that may determine whether an employer is subject to the employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act or is eligible to participate in the SHOP -LRB- small business group insurance -RRB- offering -LRB- s -RRB- in the government health insurance marketplaces . Totally simple , right ? Any business owner would be well advised to seek out a knowledgeable health insurance broker/consultant to assist them is making these determinations and explaining the record keeling , tracking and reporting requirements the employer may be subject to under the Affordable Care Act . Getting this stuff wrong could have serious tax implications for the employer . If I can be of any assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me as I am a Chartered Benefit Consultant .
Health insurance for small businesses works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan . There are different types of programs available for group coverage and each business may have a different tolerance for what they 're willing to take on in terms of price or what they 're willing to offer to their employees . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There 's really no way to say what group coverage costs without going through that input first to create the quotes . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you will need to consult with an experienced health insurance broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help -LRB- we can help you get your company 's group health insurance set up -RRB- and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You 've touched on one of the inequities of our system , the essentially unequal tax treatment of individual versus group health insurance . Group health insurance plans are tax advantaged in two ways ; 1 -RRB- what the employer pays towards coverage is a deductible business expense , and 2 -RRB- the employee 's share of their insurance premium costs can be deducted from their paychecks on a pretax basis and reducing their net cost of buying health insurance . Neither of these tax advantages apply to individual health insurance coverage a person might purchase for themselves . Though , as of January 1 , 2014 , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act , person 's purchasing individual health insurance through the government marketplaces may qualify for an advanced premium tax subsidy depending upon their income level . So , in simple terms , in the group health insurance world you may be able to pay for your portion of your health insurance on a pre-tax basis but in the individual health insurance world you are generally in a post-tax payment environment -LRB- I 'm not going to stray into how some small business owners structure their business expenses and taxes as it regards these matters -RRB- .
A commercial renters policy is designed for a business . The type of business makes a great difference in the premium . Some businesses operate on a slightly different type of policy that provides coverages unique to their business , for example , jewelry stores . The traditional policy is called a business owners package and it provides coverage for contents , liability protection and other miscellaneous coverages . Because businesses vary so much there isnt an average policy . I do know that an insurance agency costs around $ 600 per year for a small office and range much higher as the business operation is larger .
Unlike omst parts of the Affordable Care Act , if you are employed by a business with less than 50 full time employees , your employer has the option of offering coverage , but not is not mandated to do so . The health law does not require businesses with fewer than 50 employees to offer health insurance to their workers . Small Employers wanting to offer coverage to employees may do so using the SHOP exchange , which is meant to help small business owners find affordable coverage . The government offers certainincentives in the form oftax credits and deductions to encourage employers with fewer than 25 employees who set up coverage through SHOP and help pay for it . Currently in Alabama , the only way to sign up for a SHOP plan is to go see an agent , broker or insurance company and fill out the paperwork . Online enrollment is scheduled to be available during next fall 's open enrollment period , starting November 15 , 2014 .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Basics Do I Need To Know About Disability Insurance ?
The # 1 thing you need to know about disability insurance is that it is paycheck protection in times of prolonged sickness and injury . You need to select an elimination period . Most Americans have 90 days in cash reserves , so a 90 day elimination period is a consideration . When claims are filled and the elimination period satisfied , the benefits are paid tax free .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
I presume from your question that you must be a health care provider or supply some type of service and/or product that is reimbursable under health insurance plans . First , you need to determine the competitive environment for your product or service in your marketplace . If you have lots of competition your negotiating position will not be as strong -LRB- perhaps nonexistent -RRB- as if there is limited competition for your product or service in your marketplace . The insurance company will know the answer to this question from their perspective so you need to know the answer too before engaging in discussions with insurance carriers . Know what the absolute minimum is that you can accept as payment for your product or service . In today 's environment cost is the main driver in provider contracting , any insurance carrier is going to want the lowest possible cost from any provider/vendor they contract with . What they want to pay could well be below your cost of providing the service . You will have to make a business decision if such an arrangement would make business sense in the overall context of your total business model . What is your unique selling proposition ? What do you offer that a competitor or other product does not provide or provide as well ? Do you offer a qualitative advantage , a price advantage , or both ? They are going to ask you these questions and expect you to prove it so be prepared . Do research on the insurance carriers . Does your target market align with theirs ? If your focus is on infant care calling on an insurance carrier who is more focused on the senior marketplace is obviously a waste of everyone 's time . Even among health insurance carriers that from the outside seem to be competing for the same market segment you will find upon closer examination that they all have their areas of market strengths and weaknesses and marketplace segments they focus on . Some are more oriented towards individual and small group health insurance while others really shine in the large group space . Knowing this in advance and knowing what your capabilities are will allow you to focus on the prospective carriers best aligned with the marketplace that is also the best fit for your product or service . Once you have these basics understood you can begin contacting the various insurance carriers and ask to be put in touch with the department and/or person who handles the insurance carrier 's provider contracting and you can let the games begin .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
First I 'd like to say that your question , `` Do I need life insurance now that I 'm getting married '' is a mature question that indicates you genuinely care about your future wife and family and are an intelligent thinker ! Good on ya ! The answer to whether you need insurance or not really relies on your financial strength and goals . If you have a few million dollars in liquid assets you probably do n't NEED insurance ... but you may still WANT to have Whole Life , Cash Value life insurance . The wealthiest people in the world typically are the biggest buyers of WL insurance , because of the value it has . On the other hand there are many people who are self insured feeling that the money they have acquired is sufficient to cover the needs of their family in the event of their demise . Obviously those people do n't know what the wealthiest people know about WL insurance . So in order to determine what kind of life insurance you should consider , -LRB- there are over 10 different kinds of life insurance -RRB- , and how much is appropriate , you should consult with a life insurance professional - preferably one who is not tied to just one provider and can help you to implement the program that will be the best for you . If you would like to talk about this further you can call or email me . I 'm only licensed in Hawaii , but I 'm happy to help you with the more important questions .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
It generally pretty easy to see who actually cares about your best interest when dealing with an agent . A good agent will sit down with you , get to know you a little about what the insurance is going to cover and about you personally , ask you a series of questions about your needs , and come up with several different ideas to suite you based on your needs and your personal financial situation . They 'll take the time to explain the basics of each policy and what the pros and cons are of each one . Most importantly , they 'll listen to you and understand your situation . It should never be a pressed situation because buying life insurance is probably the most important thing you 'll ever do for your family in terms of protecting them .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
First of all , dont go to websites with life insurance rates . I know everybody likes to do this , but youll never get good information . Why not ? Simply because you need to know the rate class for what you qualify with any given company . How do you really know you qualify for preferred ? Preferred Best ? Standard ? The problem is that the vetting questions used on these websites are never thorough enough to give you a really reliable underwriting classification . Besides , what about all the gray areas that need explanation ? You used to drink heavily , but now you dont . But you stopped only a month ago . Is that long enough to avoid a rated premium ? So what do you do ? You get yourself a broker who will prequalify you . He or she will compile a risk profile about you based on thorough and accurate quote information . He will advocate on your behalf to make sure you receive all the credit you deserve for the risk management and avoidance you are doing . He will present this to selected carriers with a reputation for being competitive for a profile such as yours . Then , when you get numbers from different carriers , they will mean something because you know you really qualify for them .
Before I can answer your question of how much Life Insurance for your child I really need to know what the purpose is . I recently helped a client who wanted to put $ 100 into a life insurance policy per month so it grows cash value plus providing a death benefit . First you need to know some of the `` rules '' we have in the insurance world revolving around children . Insurance companies will need to know how much insurance the parents have first . You see , no one depends on the children so if parents have no insurance , they it will be difficult to convince insurance companies to give a policy on the child . The parents usually need to have about 4x the amount the kids have . Because the cost of insurance is so low on most children , it can be difficult to put a lot of money into a policy without creating a MEC , modified endowment contract . This means that when you take money out of the policy , you will have to deal with taxes . If you are just looking for a burial type policy which you would like to give to your child as a gift when they are older , perhaps when they have a family , you might just start off with a $ 50k or so type of policy . Underwriting is usually minimal in most cases . You can get insurance for your children starting at $ 4 for $ 50k of death benefit , basically the same cost you would pay if you added them to your insurance as a child rider . Contact your broker for more details or contact me .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
The average cost in the US has been around $ 850 for the past several year . My data could be a bit off and old , but in the last several years competition for auto business has kept pricing static . Here is the basic issue question : I do n't know who you are in a demographic sense , but also in the sense of needing coverage to protect yourself . . Auto Insurance is regulated by the various 50 states and can a bit different in what coverages are required to be offered.But here is what typically comprises and auto policy : Bodily Injury Liability -LRB- protection for the people you kill or injure -RRB- Property Damage -LRB- for the car you hit or the 18 wheeler you force off the road unintentionally -RRB- Medical Payments for the little issue that happens in your car that you do n't want to have to file suit against some one to be indemnified -LRB- i.e. your passenger catching their finger in the closing of a door -RRB- Collision for damage to your own car in a wreck or hitting a curb or a pot hole etc. . ComprehensiveCoverage : for theft , flood , hail , falling trees , broken windshields etc And last , but probably the most important coverage on your policy , Uninsured and Under-insured Motorist Coverage So , despite all the ads to the contrary you ought to take more than 15 minutes to figure , with the help of an agent , what exposures you have . The worst scenarios have nothing to do with fixing your cars , it is about fixing peoples lives and keeping you assets . So to answer your question I would need to know what do you have to lose , if you cause injury to someone else , because what you do not pay for in insurance you will pay for on your own including future garnishment of your income . A fairly decent rule of thumb to consider things by would be to look at your lifestyle . If you already own your own home -LRB- including with a mortgage -RRB- you need a minimum of 100/300/100 spit limits of Bodily Injury Coverage -LRB- that protects the people you hit -RRB- and you should carry the same to protect yourself , your family and passengers in your car with the same limit of 100/300/100 for Uninsured and under insured motorist coverage . If you do not understand how all of these pieces of the coverage fit together then you should really seek out an Independent agent who sells for multiple companies and can tailor the policy to your needs If you live in AZ , CA , TX , GA , or MO I would be glad to assist you -LRB- call 1-866-933-4372 -RRB- -LRB- open 8 AM to 8 PM Est Monday through Friday -RRB- . If you live elsewhere seek out an Independent Agent in your area Good luck to you and I hope this answer helps some Jack Heller , CPCU
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
It varies by UL policy and company , but here are a few basics . There are basically 2 parts to all ULs , but there may be more . The one I have has 3 parts . Part A is how much you pay into for just the life insurance coverage and part B is what goes into the accumulation account to make the policy grow money wise . A UL has flexible premiums meaning you can pay in as little or as much as you want within a specified amount within the contract guidelines . There is also the target amount which is what you probably should be paying in minimally . If you pay the minimum , it basically is a term policy that continues . If you decide you want the account to grow , you can put more money into to make the cash accumulation grow . I usually tell the clients I work with to think of it as a permanent life policy with a high yield bank savings account since most will offer you at worst a 3 % return for ever dollar you put into the accumulation section of the account . Do keep in mind that rates maybe be more or less depending on the policy and current interest rates that the insurance company uses . There are many other factors in these types of life policies , but that is the basics of it .
In order to tell you how much car insurance is for a single person . And I assume this quote would be for the person who asked the question I would need to know several things . Your address , your date of birth , your drivers license number , type of vehicle , annual miles driven , in some areas your Social Security number . We would need to review the coverage 's you desire , I would also want to know your occupation and/or school history as there are additional discounts that may be available . While there are other questions I would have these are the basics . Then I can find out how much auto insurance would cost you .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Long Term Care Insurance Worth The Expense ?
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Long term care insurance is not worth the cost if it causes you to cut back on groceries or medication or other essentials needed for a healthy and happy life . If you have very little savings , assets or investments , long term care insurance may also not be worth the cost . If you can afford it , you might want to buy long term care insurance for the options it offers you for your care . However , you would not need it to protect your assets if you do not have assets to protect . Long term care insurance IS worth the cost for those who have a lot to lose if they would have to pay expensive nursing home , assisted living , in home , or other care costs for an extended period of time . It also is worth the cost for those who have strong feelings about being able to pay for the type of care they want , rather than rely on where Medicaid allows .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Long Term Health Insurance -LRB- known as Long Term Care Insurance -RRB- is worth it for some people and not for others . If you have a large amount of savings , investments , and/or property , Long Term Care Insurance can protect your estate by paying for the cost of caring for you if you can not care for yourself . If you have very little in the way of assets , LTCI may not be worth it , as Medicaid would cover the cost of staying in a nursing home . However , whether you have a large estate or not , Long Term Care Insurance does provide some freedom in choosing where you receive your care . And for some people that is worth the price of the insurance .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Long Term Care Insurance is not an investment at all . It is a morbidity insurance product to fund long term care expenses , generally a defensive planning tactic during retirement . If the question is along the lines of : Is long term care insurance money worth spending , then the answer is yes . If you dont have long term care , then your investments will be at risk to the expenditures of extended care during your senior years .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
People who have very few assets and/or income should probably not get long term care insurance . If there are immediate needs that will go unmet because you are concerned about a possible long term care stay in the future , then the cost of long term care insurance may not be worth it . Also , if you may perhaps go on Medicaid in the future , even without needing long term care services , you should not purchase long term care insurance , in most situations .
Is long term care worth the price ? That really is up to the individual . I guess those who go through the steps to purchase long term care feel it is worth both the time and money to own . Long term care is n't for everybody , but it is for those who want some control over the care they receive in the later stages of their life .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Whether Long Term Care Insurance is worth the investment depends on how many assets you have to protect . For those who do not have very large estates and who are struggling to make ends meet from month to month , buying Long Term Care Insurance may not make much sense . On the other hand , those who have assets of hundreds of thousands of dollars may find paying a couple hundred of dollars a month for a Long Term Care insurance policy as a good investment . If extended care was needed , their policy would pay for it so that their assets would be safe . The policy would also given them more choices for their care , which some would consider worth the money .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
When you consider that the average married couple will spend around $ 250,000 during their retirement years is it worth it to protect against that probable event ? A married coupled age 60 with standard health will pay around $ 300 a month for long term care . Is that worth it ? Some consumers object to long term care because they may never use it , so they lose it . There are alternatives with life and annuity products that offer living benefits , in this case long term care , that may have cash value results if the living benefits are used .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Role Of A Life Insurance Underwriter ?
A life insurance underwriter assesses the medical condition of the proposed insured as well as beneficiary election and financial justification . Overall insurance justification establishes whether the amount of coverage and the beneficiaries of the application are warranted before moving forward in the underwriting process . The paramount issue is here is the economic loss suffered by beneficiaries at the death of the insured . The medical information of the proposed insured contains the attending physicians statements , the insurance exam results , prescription medications and the application answers to determine an underwriting offer . The collection of this data can be a time consuming process from 4-6 weeks .
The role of a life insurance underwriter is to evaluate and determine the degree of risk involved in issuing life insurance policies to persons applying for life insurance at their company . This could involve simply looking at the MIB and pharmacy record -LRB- for simplified issue , nonmed policies -RRB- all the way to reviewing hundreds of pages of medical records , tax returns , and/or inspection reports for very large policies . The underwriters ' role is to make sure that the insurance company they work for does not lose excessive amounts of money by charging too little , but does not lose business by charging too much . Underwriters are a very important part of a reputable and secure life insurance company .
An actuary takes years of statistics and projects life expectancies for every age . From this information a standard rate is developed . The underwriter reviews the information provided on an insurance application . The purpose of this procedure is to decide how close to standard a specific risk is . The underwriter will make a determination upon which the company will either decline a risk or make an offer to insure . In the vast majority of cases the policies are issued at standard rates but the underwriter might adjust the offer either increasing or decreasing the premium as is warranted .
I am so glad you asked this question . Life insurance is an underwriting-driven sale . A well-managed underwriting process will yield both good pricing and good service . This is what you need to keep the client satisfied . The underwriter has the final word . At the same time , the client , the broker , the general agent , the case manager and the underwriter all collaborate in making things happen . In addition , third-parties such as physicians offices , and advisers such as accountants and attorneys and bankers , all have a role to play . Let me give you some examples of how things could work the right way , and also the wrong way . The right way can get you an approval in a matter of weeks . The wrong way can drag it out to months and months and months . First of all , you as the client must go through full disclosure . Answer every question thoroughly and accurately . Make sure you get prequalified so that any underwriting challenges are addressed before you submit a formal application . You might have to clarify elements of your medical history . You might have to give details on risky activities such as mountain climbing a scuba diving . Amendments to physician records may be needed . If all this information is collected up front , then you can benefit in two ways . First of all you can be confident that you have both competitive and reliable quotes . Your application should be approved at the rate quoted . In addition , the underwriting process should run more smoothly because a number of underwriting requirements have already been obtained . If you dont get prequalified , and underwriting challenges are not addressed before hand , then all the time needed to do so will delay the formal underwriting process . It is also important to get the insurance exam completed quickly . Those lab and test results are essential to evaluating the level of risk you present . It may be that your blood chemistry is off the day you take the exam , and that might raise some questions . You might even have to repeat the exam . Or clarification may be needed from your doctor . Better to take care of these items sooner rather than later . The longer you wait in scheduling that exam , the longer the evaluation will take , and the longer it will take to remedy any emerging issues . Medical records are also a dealmaker or a dealbreaker . They too play a huge role in assessing risk . These days many physician offices are short-staffed and overloaded with bureaucratic insurance company and government requirements . They often contract with services to make copies of records . Their turnover of requests for copies of files is often slow . Bear in mind that they are paid in advance and well paid for this service . You as the patient may have to get involved to stress the importance of a faster turnaround . Many times , statements and documents from professional advisors are needed . In one case I have , I obtained a medical approval of great pricing over six months ago . However , copies of trust and buy sell agreement documents are required to get the final approval , and to issue the policies . The attorneys and accountants still havent delivered . General agents play a key role in delivering customer satisfaction . Brokers typically do not deal directly with underwriters - we deal with general agents who operate at the wholesale level . A general agent who has strong leverage with carriers will be able to deliver underwriting concessions . He or she will also be able to intervene as needed and advocate on behalf of the client and broker if snags pop up during underwriting . Things can happen . Sometimes one underwriter will prequalify a case , and another will formally underwrite it . These two may not agree on what the price should be . The general agent needs to stay on top of this and get the dispute resolved as quickly as possible . Case managers are also key . These are personnel inside general agencies who expedite requirements . If they are really on the ball , then the broker is notified promptly of the need for outstanding records , documents , client information , etc. . If they are slack , then requirements are filled too slowly . I think too many agencies just rely on software to give updates . This technology is useful ; at the same time , managers really do need to stay involved personally with cases and move them along . It takes the personal touch . In essence , with the right team approach and cooperation from all involved , then things can happen relatively quickly . The broker needs to treat underwriting as such and provide proper direction . Without this leadership , there is so much room for error that underwriting can become a nightmare .
The role of a life insurance underwriter is to evaluate and determine the degree of risk involved in issuing life insurance policies to persons applying for life insurance at their company . This could involve simply looking at the MIB and pharmacy record -LRB- for simplified issue , nonmed policies -RRB- all the way to reviewing hundreds of pages of medical records , tax returns , and/or inspection reports for very large policies . The underwriters ' role is to make sure that the insurance company they work for does not lose excessive amounts of money by charging too little , but does not lose business by charging too much . Underwriters are a very important part of a reputable and secure life insurance company .
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
The best insurance company is the company that pays the most when you have a loss . All insurance companies are companies that manage a pool of similar risks . Every insurance company is regulated by the insurance commissioner in the state where the company is organized and the state where the company is allowed to transact business . This combination of state supervision is designed to make sure that each company keeps their promises . There are rating bureaus that offer information concerning various insurance companies . These bureaus generally give higher ratings to larger companies with longer histories . They are rating the financial capacity of the companies . While this is a good indicator of which insurance company to choose it is far from the only criteria . Ultimately most people buy homeowners insurance from an agent . That agent might represent one company or one hundred companies . The point is that the relationship is not with the company as much as it is with the agent . People buy insurance from people that they trust . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . The agent will propose a company . Few reject the company selected by the agent . The role of the company is to keep the promises that it makes . There are a wide range of homes for insurance companies to insure . Some companies have an appetite for homes that are in the mountains or heavily wooded areas . Other companies will not even consider such a risk . Some companies will insure homes on bluffs overlooking the ocean while others wont consider such a risk . Underwriting will often have special rules regarding roof type , location of an evaporative cooler , presence of certain pets and presence of certain types of recreational equipment . There are many reasons for some of these underwriting decisions but the agent will be able to identify the best company for you . The underwriter will try to suggest appropriate coverages . Even if you had the most highly rated company if the limits selected are not adequate , you could be left with a large loss in the event of a disaster . For example , you might have a significant amount of jewelry , photographic equipment , or musical instruments . If these are not insured correctly their loss could represent a significant financial loss for you . The most significant area of underinsuring is liability . Your agent should let you know the highest amount that the company will provide . If you choose less coverage , any loss in excess to the limit in the policy will come out of your assets . Your agent should tell you about the availability of umbrella liability coverage . A lawsuit can make havoc out of the best financial plan . Finally the way that the company pays the loss when you have a claim is the most critical factor . Homeowners claims are infrequent but tend to be severe . It is important that the agent you have selected assists you during this critical period . Maintaining communications with you during a claim is an identification of a really good insurance company .
That would depend on many factors . The price of the home , your personal property in the home , and your geographic location just to name a few things . All of these are going to play a role in the coverage that are offered . The company that you chose will also play a major role in the types of coverage that is offered . Please contact a local agent , they are going to be able to help direct you to the coverages that will best suit your needs . If one company does not offer the coverage you are looking for try another .
Purchasing long term care insurance is a process that has many steps . Of course your budget will play a big role in the policy you ultimately buy . The assets you have , and expect to have in the future is critical along with the liquidity of those assets . As I have mentioned many times in previous questions -LRB- I guess that 's why I am an `` expert '' -RRB- your medical history will play a role in determining when and how much to purchase . This includes family history and any hazardous sports and hobbies you may engage in . A full-time experienced broker that specializes in this type of policy is your best resource . They can shop , explain and research your options . Although many folks claim to be experts , the full-time experienced agent/broker is invaluable .
Medicare does not include any medical treatment that is considered `` expermental '' . This does not mean that a medical procedure that is being studied would be excluded . Your Physician would be the best resource for this information . Usually , the treatment for various types of blood disorders and cancers are recgonized procedures that would be covered by Medicare . You can read the section regarding this on the Centers for Medicare and Medicare Services website that is here : WEBSITELINK . I would encourage anybody about to receive treatment to consult with your Physician 's office about the role of Medicare in their treatment payment . You should check with your Insurance plan if you have a Medicare Supplement and have them determine their role as well . If you have Medicare Advantage , they will follow Medicare guidelines and you will need to get preauthorization .
Yes , you can get life insurance on your husband . He needs to sign the application and be willing to submit to the underwriting requirements , which may include an exam that is done in your home or place of his choice . If he does not want to take an exam , he could get No Exam life insurance . Some of those require a phone interview . You can be the Owner , Payor , and Beneficiary of the policy , or any combination of those roles .
There is no one carrier that is the best in term or permanent life insurance . As you become older , a critical component that separates one carrier from another is underwriting . Your health history and current medical condition play a significant role in securing the best price and product . As you getting beyond age 50 , a handful of carriers emerge as significant players .
Disability insurance is a complex morbidity product priced on the basis of your personal medical and behavioral information and annual compensation . Your age , gender , smoking status , health history and current medical condition play a role in the underwriting decision and ultimately the price tag . Behavioral items like motor vehicle violations , vocational hazards and recreational activities also contribute to the premium you 'll pay for coverage . One of the leading disability companies is the Standard .
How much life insurance you should buy depends on what you want the life insurance to do . If your need is to cover a specific purpose , for example to leave your family well positioned in the event of your death , then the amount of insurance should include enough funds to replace your income -LRB- human life value -RRB- , cover your debts , estate costs , establish an emergency fund and more . If family protection is your objective , your insurance agent can help you with the calculations . Many insurance companies offer online calculators to give you a point of reference . Life insurance can play an important role in your financial and retirement planning . An independent life insurance broker can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The best type of life insurance to buy depends on your needs and income . You can start by using a life insurance calculator found on some websites , to determine what role life insurance could play in your family 's financial portfolio . Most people use Term insurance to cover events over a limited period of time , such as getting your children through college or paying off a mortgage if the breadwinner was to die an untimely death . For events that have no time limit , such as using life insurance to pay for funereal expenses or to pass an inheritance to your descendants , permanent Life Insurance may be best . A good agent can help you translate your needs and budget into affordable life insurance coverage that will be best for you and those you are trying to protect .
How much life insurance you need and what kind depends on a number of factors . Life insurance plays an important role in your financial and retirement planning . Life insurance creates cash at death and can also offer tax advantaged growth . The first step is to clarify what you want to accomplish and if the need is temporary or permanent . In a family situation , for example , you might want to replace your income , pay off the mortgage , establish an emergency fund , an education fund , pay fees and taxes at death and/or leave a legacy . In this situation , your advisor can help with the calculations . You can find basic calculators online to get you started . In a business situation , you might want insurance to fund a buy-sell agreement , provide a buffer fund for the death of a key person or as an executive or employee benefit . If your need is temporary , such as covering a short term loan , then a term policy is appropriate . If there is a possibility you may need permanent coverage in the future , you should check to see what conversion options to permanent coverage are available . If your need is permanent , which means that you want the coverage to pay when you die , not if you die before the policy expires , then a permanent policy is appropriate . Whole Life and Universal Life are two types of permanent insurance . Permanent cash value insurance has tax preferred growth that you can take advantage of . An independent insurance broker can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
It can vary a lot from one person to the next , and even what city and state you live in . In my area of the country -LRB- the mid-west -RRB- I would save an average person spends from $ 60 - $ 150 / month for full coverage car insurance . Your credit will play a role in your rate as well as your driving record and even what other drivers might have access to your car .
Generally speaking , tax deferred index annuities use domestic and foreign indices for its crediting method . But there are three crediting method types within any one policy -LRB- sometimes more -RRB- that play a role in what you receive from the indice performance : spreads , rate caps and participation percentage . Participation determines what portion of the performance is credited to the annuity policy , i.e. 70 % of a 10 % net return would credited 7 % .
Renters insurance coverage from Allstate depends on a number of different factors . Of course , the amount of coverage on your personal contents is one of the biggest variables along with what other limits you elect . Where you live and what type of claims history may also play a role in the rate . A licensed Allstate broker can provide the exact rate ... probably in the $ 100 - $ 300 per year range .
Depending on what state you live in Montana there is no rate difference for males or females . Also your driving history and prior insurance plays a role in rates , many cases the average here in Montana drops after the age of 25 no matter what sex you are . If you have had no tickets in 3 years or accidents in 5 years the rate should lower . a Reputable agent will requite your renewal to see if there is another carrier with a better rate available .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Which Individual Health Insurance Covers Pregnancy ?
Under the affordable care act , every health insurance plan must cover the 10 essential health benefits - maternity care -LRB- including pregnancy -RRB- is one of the essential health benefits . Therefore every individual plan will provide some form of coverage for that type of benefit . How much a plan will pay when that benefit is used will vary from plan to plan . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced health insurance broker to determine which plan will be most suitable for your specific needs and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It really depends on the type of short term disability plan that you have . Most I have seen will not cover a normal pregnancy but will a complicated pregnancy . Some disability insurance will not cover any type of pregnancy without a medical diagnosis of a complication caused by the pregnancy other than the pregnancy itself . If you can locate your policy , read the exclusions and limitations page to find out what it specifically covers in regards to pregnancy .
It depends on the carrier . Some carriers do not treat normal pregnancy as a sickness that keeps a woman from working and do not replace income during a normal pregnancy . However , to fully answer the question , request a `` specimen policy '' from the carrier you may beconsidering to find out the exact contract language aboutthe replacement of incomeduring pregnancy . Here is a typical treatment of normal pregnancy from a highly-reputable carrier for DI : `` If the Elimination Period for Your Disability Benefit is less than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are not covered Sicknesses . However , if the Elimination Period is equal to or greater than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are covered Sicknesses subject to the definition of Disability . '' Now , one has to refer to this carrier 's specific definition of disability in the specimen policy : `` During the Your Occupation Period * you are not able to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material acts necessary to perform your occupation in the usual and customary way and you choose not to work at any occupation . After the Your Occupation Period You are not able to engage with reasonable continuity in any occupation in which you could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of your age , education , training , experience , station in life , and physical and mental capacity . '' * Insurance-speak for the occupation you are in when you become disabled ; you pick the period of this part of the definition of disability when you apply , typically 2 years up to age-67 . The longer the your occupation period , the higher the premium . Thats because the risk to the company is higher to replace income for a longer period of time due to the fact that the choice to work in another position or not during this period is yours . The key to the question is : does your condition of pregnancy restrict you from working ? The insurance carrier will want to know that from your doctor before they will start the clock on the elimination period -LRB- 90 days -RRB- , after the fulfillment of which you will start to get income replacement checks . If you add a `` partial disability rider ' , usually at extra cost , you might not have to be `` totally '' unable to work in your occupation to get a pro-rated replacement of income as you work part-time . Again , refer to the specimen policy .
This is a very common question and the answer is that it depends on the carrier and its definition of total disability . Normal pregnancy is not considered a disability by some carriers . In fact , it is clearly excluded from coverage in the contract . For others , as long as it falls into their definition of what constitutes a total disability , they will replace income after the elimination period is satisfied . The definition of disability is key . A typical definitionmight be something like `` the inability to perform the usual and customary duties of the occupation -LRB- job -RRB- in which the insured is working at the beginning of a disabling event ... '' A less favorable definition would add the words , `` and is unable to work in any other occupation . '' Since many women are able to performthe primary duties of their occupation during the first two trimesters of a normal pregnancy , some carriers do not automatically consider a leave for pregnancy a trigger point to replace income . And , if they do , 90 days is a typical elimination period - a kind of `` time deductible '' before one qualifies for benefits - most women would probably not satisfy the elimination period before the baby was born anyway . If there were complications resulting from pregnancy , then that 's a whole different situation , and if they started to occur early enough in the pregnancy and did qualify under the definition of disability , the elimination period would theoretically start sooner and benefits might be paid out before birth . If you are beginning a new job and think you might become pregnant or intend to become pregnant during the time you are employed with that company , be sure to ask Human Resources if the company provides disability insurance as a group benefit and if the coverage includes normal pregnancy .
Every insurance carrier will ask medical questions when completing an application.Some carriers will decline applications for pregnant women.Many willnot ask any pregnancy related questions , so you may be able to purchase a policy while pregnant in many cases . Every policy will exclude coverage for any preexisting medical condition . That exclusion may last 6 to 12 months . That means your existing pregnancy will not be covered , but accidents and illnesses unrelated to your pregnancy may be covered . Policies covering normal childbirth are difficult to find . They are only offered through employers . If you have the opportunity to buy a policy it may be your only chance to get covered for future pregnancies .
Short Term Disability Insurance covers time taken off for a normal pregnancy and childbirth . No Disability Insurance would cover taking off the entire pregnancy for a normal pregnancy . Long Term Disability Insurance is the type of DI that covers long term absence due to complications of pregnancy and childbirth .
Historically pregnant women could not obtain health insurance when individual health insurance was medically underwritten . Although Obamacare , as it is commonly known as , has many issues and problems , individuals can now obtain guarantee issue health insurance without any issues about pregnancy or pre-existing conditions . During open enrollment which begins again in November 2014 for January 2015 effective dates everyone that wants to apply for health insurance will be approved . If you have a qualifying life event under the IRS code you will be able to purchase health insurance within 60 days of the qualifying event .
You can purchase individual life insurance while pregnant . Most companies will not have a problem with the first two trimesters underwriting an individual who is pregnant and at that point experiencing a normal pregnancy without complications . The third trimester is a bit more dicey as most carriers at that point may wish to wait until after childbirth to underwrite . I have written and had issued life insurance for people up to the 7th month without any extra premium or restrictions by the insurance company . It is going to depend on the health of the person and how the pregnancy is going .
I have never seen any exclusion for pregnancy . Most people on Medicare are beyond child bearing years . If a person who is younger and receiving Medicare because of disability gets pregnant the pregnancy would most likely be covered the same as any illness . Under the new PPACA law pregnancy is required to be covered for all female applicants of health insurance .
Can I get disability insurance when pregnant ? Well possibly , but you wo n't like that they would exclude covering time off for the pregnancy as it is a pre-existing condition . Depending on your health at the time , and where you are at in the pregnancy , you could be covered , but not for the pregnancy .
You can purchase a short term disability policy while pregnant . Many carriers will not ask pregnancy related questions on the application , although some do . The policy may cover any accidents or illnesses not caused by a preexisting condition after one year . Future pregnancies will be covered , however no policy will cover your current pregnancy .
Many people want to get Disability Insurance to cover time off for pregnancy and childbirth , in Nebraska and every other state . Unfortunately , the only way to have a normal pregnancy covered is to receive short term disability through your employer , or to purchase it as an individual policy , BEFORE becoming pregnant .
Unfortunately , it is not possible to purchase disability insurance that will cover your pregnancy , after you are pregnant , in Rhode Island or other states . The pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition . If you are buying the disability insurance with the idea of excluding pregnancy related extended absences , it may be possible that some disability policies would cover you with an exclusion .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
To get Disability Insurance to cover normal pregnancy , you need Short Term Disability . Most people get this type of policy paid for through their work , or are offered a group short term policy that they can pay for on their own . If purchasing an individual short term disability policy , you must apply for it before you are pregnant . Long term disability insurance will cover pregnancy that involves complications .
Yes , short term disability insurance does cover maternity leave if purchased at the right time -LRB- meaning , before you become pregnant -RRB- and with a policy that states that it has that benefit . Unlike long term disability insurance , which only covers complications of pregnancy , short term disability insurance covers time off related to normal pregnancy and childbirth .
Normally , pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition and not covered by a disability insurance policy . It is up to the company whether they would postpone taking the application or exclude that pregnancy from coverage . Once the baby is born , you can apply for disability insurance prior to becoming pregnant again , to obtain coverage for that pregnancy .
It will depend on whether your policy covers maternity or not . Usually complications of pregnancy would be covered but not necessarily normal pregnancy . Check your policy or call your company . Beginning in 2014 maternity is a requirement according to the new health care mandates for minimum required coverage . This is part of the reasons you will see cost of health insurance rise .
Up until the third trimester , you should have no problem getting life insurance while pregnant , as long as you fit the weight guidelines and have no serious complications . If you have manageable health conditions associated with your pregnancy , such as controlled gestational diabetes , you can still get Preferred rates with some companies . I just had a policy approved today at the best rate class for someone who applied in her second term of pregnancy for a medically underwritten policy . Some companies restrict applying in the third trimester , but there are nonmed policies that you can get at any stage of pregnancy .
My experience has been that it is possible to get life insurance during the first trimester , but that insurance agencies are reluctant to take an application for a woman in her second and third trimesters of pregnancy , in case of complications . But I am sure there are some companies that will cover women who are up to 6 months pregnant with a medically underwritten policy , especially if they have had previous event free pregnancies and have no pre-existing conditions . For those who are in the third trimester of pregnancy , there are No Exam policies you can get .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will A Pellet Stove Increase Homeowners Insurance ?
Wood burning devices are a concern to the underwriter for a homeowners policy because they have an open flame inside the house . Insurance companies rarely change their rate based upon an increased exposure . Instead they are more likely to not accept the risk at all . A pellet stove is probably the least dangerous wood burning device . Many companies will issue a standard homeowners policy on a home with pellet stove .
Wood burning devices are a concern to the underwriter for a homeowners policy because they have an open flame inside the house . Insurance companies rarely change their rate based upon an increased exposure . Instead they are more likely to not accept the risk at all . A pellet stove is probably the least dangerous wood burning device . Many companies will issue a standard homeowners policy on a home with pellet stove .
That 's a good question . You will need the following information . Your full name , Date of Birth , address of the home , phone number , the year the home was built , living square feet , condition of the home , updates completed for plumbing/electrical/heating / roof , list of pets , central station alarm information -LRB- if you have one -RRB- , wood burning stove answer -LRB- yes/no -RRB- , trampoline question -LRB- yes/no -RRB- , pool -LRB- fenced ? -RRB- , prior claims to the property and to you , and usually your social security number , purchase price , estimated rebuild cost and appraisal . Having all of that information will help you get the best rate possible on your homeowners insurance . Many insurance companies will have different tiers they can offer . Many factors go into rating a homeowners policy but generally it will depend upon your credit history , cost of reconstruction , prior claims and the deductible you choose . Hope this answer helps you !
This is a great question . Homeowners insurance rates are on the rise in Oklahoma due to all of the claims activity over the past several years . There are many factors to what generates your homeowner 's insurance premium . I hope this makes sense to you and answers your question . Here are some questions that you need to answer prior to receiving a quotation . Where do you live ? Is it a rural area with a volunteer fire department or do you live in a city with a full time fire department ? In the event of a fire , how long would the response time be for the fire fighters to get to your house ? Where is the closest fire hydrant ? What 's the replacement cost of your home ? Not the value of your home . How old is your house ? What is the construction type of your house ? Brick house ? Frame ? Do you have a crawl space or a slab ? Do you have carpeted floors , tile , other ? If your home is older than 20 years , when was your roof last replaced ? Has the wiring been updated ? Has the plumbing been updated ? Do you have an alarm system ? Do you have any pets ? Any children ? Who is living in the home ? Any fireplaces or wood burning stoves ? What deductible amount are you comfortable with ? What do you do for a living ? Do you have a home business ? These are just a few of many questions that your agent or future agent should ask you . Please let me know if I can answer any additional questions or help you out in any way . All the best , Josh DeBoer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc. www.fdands.com 918-582-8206
Why some apartments require renters insurance can vary . First , lets cover what renters insurance covers . It covers your personal property , your liability and medical expenses . Second , your liability and medical coverage are the parts that are most important to the apartment . This is because your liability insurance can be used to cover damage done to the building due to your negligence . For example , lets say you leave the stove on and you leave your apartment . Lets further say it starts a fire and causes damage to the building . The apartment 's insurance will pay for the damages , but then it will subrogate against your insurance -LRB- meaning it will make a claim against your renters coverage -RRB- . Therefore , many apartment complexes ' insurance companies will require that all the tenants have a renters policy so it can recoup any of its losses caused by the apartment complex 's tenants .
They can not force you to get the coverage but they can choose not to let you rent there . The coverage is well worth the cost . in most cases it is as little at $ 10.00 a month this protect you and also any damages that you may cause to the building . Example ouwl be if you left something on the stove and you caught the building on fire .
I hope so . I would hate to think the damage was intentional . What we would have to look at is what is the damage and is the damage a peril of the policy . Say for example you left your stove on and walked out of the house causing a grease fire burning your house down . This is obviously an accident assuming there was not intent to damage your home . In this case to your question this is accidental damage and is covered since fire is a peril of the policy .
Always . And the landlord should request evidence of the existence of the renters insurance . Reason number one : Under the personal liability coverage of a renters policy the carrier agrees to pay the sums the insured is legally liable for as a result of bodily injury or property damage . What type of occurrencescould be involved ? A guest in the renter 's apartment slips on a wet bathroom floor , falls , and is injured . This is bodily injury . The tenant leaves a pan of oil on the stove unattended and a fire results damaging the building . This is property damage . Reason number two : Unless legally liable , the landlord is not responsible for the tenant 's business or personal property -LRB- for things like fire , theft , mysterious disappearance , etc -RRB- The tenant should cover their own property with insurance like a renters policy .
Yes . The companies that rent out their dwellings have landlord policies . Those policies usually only cover damage to the structure from outside sources and not from the tenants . If you 're responsible for a stray candle or a stove fire which burns the house , condominium , or apartment complex down , you 'll be sued to cover those damages . Renters insurance provides liability coverage for just that situation . That liability coverage also protects you if someone gets hurt over at your place , if someone sues you because they think you said something wrong , or even if your animal attacks them . Renters insurance is also the insurance that you would need should your personal property get stolen or damaged in a loss like fire . So yes , it is legal to require renters insurance in Arizona . The good news is that it 's not only a really good option to have , but it 's also extremely affordable . If you want , we can even draft up a quote for you . Please reach out to us at www.insuranceeddie.com . Thank you .
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
Homeowner insurance premiums do not necessarily increase every year but they often do , for some of the following reasons . Check to see if your homeowner insurance carrier was granted a rate increase in your State . That would certainly be a reason . Absent a rate increase or increased hazards with regard to your property -LRB- new swimming pool , dangerous pets , etc. -RRB- , it is possible that your homeowner insurance carrier utilizes an automatic inflation guard feature , to account for increased construction costs in your area , including labor , materials , adherence to local building regulations , etc. . Check with your agent to review your policy . You may want to increase your deductible . You may also want to have the agent obtain rates for you from other carriers in your area . Try to get the strongest rated carriers , if pricing is competitive and coverages are what you want .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
Most homeowners policies include a provision that increases the coverage annually to compensate for the increased cost of construction . This annual increase usually results in a 1-3 % increase in premium . The company may have gone to the insurance commissioner and been granted a rate increase which will affect various parts of the policy differently but can result in an increase as well . Otherwise increases are due to changes of conditions or losses incurred on the property itself .
There could be any number of reasons behind a Homeowners ' premium increase so always check with your Insurance Professional about your particular policy terms and conditions . One reason may be due to the `` inflation guard '' provision that may be included in your policy . This increases the dwelling amount on your home each year , usually by about 4 % which therefore results in a corresponding premium increase . Another reason may be the general loss history in your area . Here in CT we had a few very bad winter and fall storms over the course of a three year period that resulted in a large increase in necessary Homeowners ' claims with all companies providing such coverage . As a result , insurance premiums increased to reflect that loss history .
There are many possible reasons as to why your homeowners insurance premium would rise . Not all of the reasons are under your control . Some of the more obvious reasons for an increase in your homeowners insurance premium are : inflation -LRB- the insurance carrier generally incurs more costs each year -RRB- , claims that you may have filed , a change in your credit rating , an increase in homeowners claims within your carrier or your geographic area , or increases in valuation of properties in your geographic area just to name a few .
An in-ground pool in and of itself does n't cause an increase in Homeowners ' premium , however , it does vastly increase your liability exposure . Here in Connecticut , local building departments have very specific requirements with respect to fencing around an in ground pool and the gate mechanisms as well . Gates must be self latching for exampla , and fencing needs to be a certain height . Check with your building department about those requirements . Next talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your Homeowners ' policy and specifically about the amount of Liability protection it provides . It would be smart to increase that protection within your Homeowners ' policy and to also talk about adding the extra protection of a Personal Umbrella Liability policy to your insurance plans . These are usually available in amounts of $ 1 million and up and are very reasonably priced for the added protection and peace of mind that they provide .
In general , Homeowners Insurance premiums , like all insurance premiums , reflect the amount of risk that the insurance company has determined there to be and their loss and cost experience with these risks . There are many factors that are included in rate development within the above mentioned categories . A couple of examples can be the home 's location in relation to a fire department and hydrant . Homeowners policies , for the most part , include some form of an `` inflation guard '' provision meaning that the dwelling amount will be adjusted each renewal to reflect increased costs due to inflation . Substantial renovations on a home can markedly increase the replacement value of that home and as the dwelling amount increases , so too would the proportional premium . Talk to your insurance professional about your deductible options as well as any discount opportunities in order to manage any increases .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Can I Reduce My Auto Insurance ?
You can reduce your auto insurance premiums in many ways . Of course , shopping through an experienced broker -LRB- or online through a respected website -RRB- may yield substantial savings . They do the shopping while you relax and do the saving ! Increasing your collision and comprehensive deductibles will lower your rate . There are many options that may be very cost-effective for you . Verify that you are receiving all discounts that you are entitled to by speaking to a broker . 55 and retired , good-student and low-mileage are just a few discounts that most carriers offer . Improve your driving record and/or credit . It will help ! And it may save you thousands of dollars instead of hundreds of dollars over your lifetime .
Everyone wants to pay less for car insurance but what you need to focus on is making sure you get the best value for your money . You can increase deductibles , lower liability coverage or reduce your policy to liability only but be careful before making any of these changes . Make sure you understand how much you would have to pay when you have an accident and then see if the savings makes sense for your situation .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Your auto insurance reduces when you turn 21 with most carriers . It also reduces -LRB- with many companies -RRB- when you have three years of driving experience , turn 25 or get married . It also reduces when you reach age 55 , 65 or retire . That 's a lot of reductions ! As brokers , we can easily review when your rates will reduce , and how you can best pay the lowest premium with top-rated insurers .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
It is absolutely possible to purchase automobile insurance online . I have found that the standard of care given to customers purchasing online tends to be minimal as price is usually the only issue . Even though I sell auto insurance , I myself have dialed the 1-800 insurance numbers and priced online and when they are quoting my insurance , I have never had anyone match my coverage 's . On the other hand , they have always reduced my coverage 's to match prices . You need to purchase your automobile insurance from the person that you will call when really bad things happen . Someone you can trust and depend on when you need them the most . Remember , all insurance policies are good until the claim hits .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Insurance Companies are trying to price a product before any one uses it and that is a difficult task So , things like deductibles as suggested here can limit your out of pocket expense in the short term , but maybe costly in the long run . So that is an important part of building a personal insurance program , but not necessarily a major piece . I never recommend reducing your limits . That is a drastic action and one you should avoid at all costs . For whatever reason you thought that was an adequate amount insurance before ; it is unlikely that your situation in life dictates that it no longer is necessary . Reduce your costs by how you drive . Many companies will give credit for substantially less driving . T he most correlated variable in auto insurance is actual mile s driven . So if you can reduce that , you should save on your auto policy . . Look at ride share , public transit or other ways to use your car less . If that is not practical look at ways you can drive safer . Be sure your air in your tires is correct , that you can safely see out of your side view mirrors , that you vision is good and that your attention to driving is foremost and that you are not impaired in any way including lack of sleep . Most accidents are caused by human error . Drive defensively !
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Why Should You Buy Long Term Care Insurance ?
People usually buy long term care insurance so that they can have the money to make choices for their own care ; so that they can save their resources for spouse or heirs ; and/or so their relatives do not worry about what will happen to Mom , Dad , Grandma , or Grandpa if they can no longer can care for themselves .
Statistics show that 70 percent of people who reach age 65 will have a need for long term care . By having long term care insurance , you can ensure that your family wo n't have to pull from their savings to help pay for you care should you need become unable to perform one of the activities of daily living -LRB- brushing your teeth , bathing , feeding yourself , etc. -RRB- and need to receive care -LRB- nursing home , in-home care , hospice , etc. -RRB- .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Pure Term Life insurance has premiums that increase every year as you get older . Most people do n't like a premium that goes up every year so they decide how long they need the insurance and level out the premiums by buying level premium term . When you do this you are paying extra in the earlier years in order to level out the premium in the later years of your level premium period . That is why 1-year term is much cheaper than 20-year term . When you buy term life insurance , you should determine how long you want the premium to be level and buy it for that length . For instance if your mortgage is paid off in 18-more years , you should buy a 20-year level term policy if the mortgage payoff is the reason for the insurance .
Why should you buy life insurance ? Maybe you should n't . If no one depends on you for income , if you will have no final expenses to bury or cremate you , if you do n't care about the person that might be stuck paying off your debt , then , do n't buy life insurance . Also , people that do not believe in insurance should n't buy it . In spite of the fact that owning an insurance policy is not a religious commitment , buying it might disrupt their value system and enrich an already wealthy insurance agent or insurance company . On the other hand , if you do care about anything other than yourself at all , you should consider buying it . Even a small face amount of life insurance is better than having none . It might provide you with some peace of mind as the gurney you are bleeding to death on is being rolled into the surgical unit .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
You should buy Long Term Care Insurance if you want the peace of mind that knowing that your family will not have to worry about you if you need assistance in taking care of yourself in your later years . You should buy Long Term Care Insurance if you want the freedom to choose your own caregivers and residence if you can no longer live on your own , rather than have Medicaid determine where you will live . You should buy Long Term Care Insurance if you want your hard earned savings to go to your inheritance rather than to the nursing home . Should everyone buy Long Term Care Insurance ? No . But there are some very good reasons for many people to buy Long Term Care Insurance .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
You dont have to bother if you dont have to . At least in this country for the time being , life insurance is not something that the government forces us to buy . And I hope the day never comes , because it would really mess up the life insurance marketplace . So the purchase of life insurance is voluntary . Who , then , should buy it ? If you are a billionaire , should you buy life insurance ? Sure you should . Lets suppose your estate would owe the government $ 100 million in taxes when you die . To pay this fee , your heirs might have to liquidate a bunch of businesses and buildings and other assets . They would then pay the bill dollar for dollar . Or , you could buy life insurance and pay the bill for pennies on the dollar . And keep all your assets intact as an inheritance for your heirs . Not only that : lets suppose you started a foundation to eliminate world hunger or some other noble cause . Lets suppose you wanted to leave the charity $ 100 million as a gift when you died . If you bought a life insurance policy and left that to the charity , you would only have to pay a few cents in premium for every dollar a benefit . You would have that much more money left over for other good causes . A very good use of your money . Now , lets suppose youre not a billionaire . Should you buy life insurance ? Heres the question : do you have a more economical way to take care of your family ? They have become dependent upon you . Why force them to reduce their standard of living when you die ? You could start putting money away into a fund . But what happens if you tragically died next year ? Would you have really accumulated enough money to let them live their lives ? Life insurance would provide them with all the money they need as soon as it is needed . No other financial product comes to the rescue like that . Why not die looking like a hero , as someone who cared and took measures to provide for his love ones ?
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Are Some Functions Of Life Insurance ?
The main function of Life Insurance is to protect your family and loved ones in case of your death . If you were to die , any debts that you owe , as well as the costs associated with your funeral , could be passed to your family and loved ones . Life Insurance may not keep some of these debts from passing to them , but it would certainlylessen the amount owed . Life Insurance can also be used as a savings and investment vehicle . Certain life insurance policies are tied to investment accounts and market indexes , which allows the policy to grow . These policies still have a face value , but they also will build a cash value . This cash value can be used as a loan from the policy , or they can simply be used to increase the amount of payout at the time of payment .
While the payoff of debts is one of the most common purposes people buy life insurance to fulfill , two other major areas of need that this line of insurance is used to help with is income replacement -LRB- to maintain the lifestyle your family members have become accustomed to -RRB- as well as estate planning .
Life Insurance is a financial vehicles with many different uses . Some of the more common uses -LRB- functions -RRB- of life insurance are : Death Benefit to protect a loved one College Funding vehicle Buy-Sell Agreement for business owners Executive Bonus plans to compensate key employees or business owners Vehicle to create tax-free income in retirement Income replacement Charitable Giving Mortgage Protection Final Expense These are some of the highlights , but life insurance offers a combination of features and benefits that are not available in any other financial vehicle .
Life insurance has different kinds of functions depending upon what type of policy you have . One of the most important functions in Life insurance is to protect your family and loved ones in the event of premature death . Something that is just as important as premature death is Living Benefits that protect your family and loved ones in the event you need benefits while you are still alive ! There are many needs for Life Insurance coverage but , that would be best determined by ones own needs and personal situations . Every families situation is not the same it needs to be personalized .
Yes , all companies when using paramedical exams do some drug testing as part of the chemical analysis in the underwriting process . Some drugs will effect certain levels of function within say kidney function that will show up by pushing the level higher . Alcohol for example , a legal form of a `` drug '' if consumed too close to an exam will raise blood sugars , alter the kidney function numbers and a few other numbers like those involving the liver . That is why it is never a good idea to consume significant amounts of alcohol the night before a blood/urine test . It will skew the results . Then it is up to the individual to get a second test , at their expense to show the first test was off .
When applying for life insurance you may be required to take give a blood and/or urine sample for analysis . Most people who have Hep C discover they have it in an exam when applying for life insurance . The elevated liver functions are the tip off for further consultations with the applicants primary doctor , to determine whats causing the elevated liver functions . If theres no deterioration of the liver , it is possible to receive an offer from a life insurance company .
Life insurance blood work looks at cholesterol , liver function , renal function , blood sugar , nicotine , illegal drugs , evidence of HIV , blood counts , and lipids , among some other things . Life Insurance blood tests are often the way applicants find out that they have a health condition that they might otherwise have overlooked .
Long term alcohol usage can cause cirrhosis of the liver , which will also cause liver function test elevations . This would most likely have a significant impact on your premium at best and would cause you to be declined for life insurance at worst . The casual use of alcohol can also have a direct impact on your life insurance in several ways . Alcohol consumption in the hours prior to a blood test will often cause some liver enzyme elevations . These small elevations could make the difference between rating categories causing you to pay a higher premium than you would have otherwise . In some cases it is also possible that a small elevation could cause you to be declined for life insurance . Consider a person who had a DUI conviction twenty years ago . On it 's own , this might not have any impact on a current life insurance application . Likewise slight liver function test elevations may not be a major concern to the underwriter . However , in combination this may lead to the impression that there is a long term alcohol problem . This is one of the reasons that we always recommend that applicants abstain from alcohol consumption for at least 24 hours prior to their exam .
The blood work done for a life insurance exam tests for glucose , cholesterol , triglycerides , liver function , renal function , drugs , nicotine , and some related labs . By these they can determine whether there may be underlying risks of which even the applicant may be unaware .
The life insurance company takes blood and urine tests during the life insurance application process in order to test for a number of things . They are looking for evidence of heart disease as indicated by cholesterol and other lipids , diabetes as evidenced by glucose , liver function , kidney function , blood diseases , tobacco use , drug use and HIV , among others .
The blood test used for life insurance exams tests for HIV , cholesterol and other lipids , drug use , cotinine -LRB- a metabolyte of nicotine -RRB- , liver function , kidney function , and blood glucose . While not testing for specific diseases , the blood test results can point to a variety of diseases and further documentation may be ordered if exam results are questionable .
If you have polycystic kidney disease with normal renal function and controlled blood pressure , you can get a medically underwritten policy of any size , with a table rating . If your kidney function is abnormal and/or you are on dialysis or awaiting a kidney transplant , your only choice may be a small guaranteed issue policy . Consult an agency that specializes in impaired risk life insurance to gather the pertinent health details and your best quote .
Elevated liver function test results from the life insurance exam will cause underwriters to look for the cause of the abnormal lab results . In doing so , they may do additional testing , order medical records , and/or request that the applicant fill out an alcohol questionnaire . Mild to moderate alcohol use is not generally a problem , unless you have a health condition that requires that you not drink . But excessive alcohol use , as indicated through liver function , can indeed cause higher ratings or declines .
As Tim so aptly described , the function of Disability Insurance is simply to pay you when you are unable to bring home a paycheck . While Disability Insurance itself is a very straightforward product , there are many features and riders to DI that perform different functions . E.g. Having the `` own occupation '' feature will enable you to receive payments if you can not work at your OWN job . Without it , you may be ineligible for benefits as long as you can work at ANY job . So when you got to buy Disability Insurance , do use a professional who can help you get the policy that performs best for your needs .
If the purpose of the rhinoplasty is cosmetic , Medicare will not pay for this surgery . Medicare may pay for rhinoplasty for one or more of the following conditions : to improve breathing , to repair defects in the nose caused by trauma , to treat congenital anatomical abnormalities when function of the nose is affected , to repair nasal tissue after removal of a tumor when function is affected , to treat sleep apnea or other conditions that interfere with breathing when other treatments do not work , or to reconstruct the nose in case of severe deformity .
People with many forms of mental illness can get life insurance . Bear in mind that this term can cover a wide range of impairments . I know firsthand that many of them are insurable . A lot of it boils down to the need for the life insurance . Almost anybody can qualify for a burial policy . Depending on the age of the insured , and the state of residence , a number of small policies could be available . Wont cost too much , and gets the job done . But what if you need more substantial coverage ? For example , I worked with a family who had an adult son who is mentally retarded . He was reasonably self-sufficient . He actually worked for his father part-time , and did missionary work first church . He had the skills and personality to go door-to-door and spread his gospel . The insurance company gave us money for not just final expenses , but then some for the family . There was a co-dependence there that was insurable . You can see that people who are mentally ill can establish themselves as a valued member of the group . The members of the group therefore have an insurable interest in them , and deserve money to compensate for their loss . And this could include people with many other impairments . Autism , depression , severe anxiety , PTSD . ADD . OCD . People with any and all of these can be fairly high functioning , and therefore insurable . Dont forget one other important item : planning for people with special needs . Folks with impairments can be functional , but can also remain dependent on their family members . What if those family members die ? Life insurance is needed on on the parents , or responsible siblings , so that the dependent family member can remain self-sufficient . Now , with regard to the choice of carrier : there is not a hot list of companies that take people with mental illness . Potential applicants need to be prequalified to identify the carrier with the most interest in this particular case at this particular time . And that could change from quarter to quarter , or from year-to-year . It is the job of the broker to know which companies like which types of cases .
Which is better whole life or term ? Depends on what you want your coverage to provide you . Both are functional practical products that serve people very well . The trick is to figure out which is best for your situation and diminish outside noise about what you `` should '' have done . The choice is personal and opinions will always vary . I chose whole life and have been very happy with it and it 's performance , as I understand RISK and what my tolerances for it are .
Is an Annuity `` Better '' than an IRA ? First let 's establish what an IRA is ? An IRA is NOT an investment , it is a tax favored shoe box , that investments , including an annuity , can be placed in for tax favored status . An annuity already has tax favored status and is not subject to IRS contribution limits as to what ever you put in an IRA would be . So as to `` better '' as usual better becomes the function of what an individual needs . There is no straight forward `` better . ''
That is a great question ! And an interesting one . I guess the answer depends upon how long you 've had the policy , and how well you 've kept track of it ; or whether it is a good policy to get at all , if I 'm reading into your question rightly . Here 's what I advise people . A UL policy can be a good thing if you are somebody that keeps an eye on everything , and has extra money lying around . You also have to have a healthy risk tolerance . Agents will rightly tell you that this type of policy can bring great returns , but press them hard , and make them tell you exactly what stars and moons need to align for that to happen . What is the actual performance of the policy over time , not the best case scenario printed in the sales brochure ? How much over the minimum payment is required to achieve that performance ? That 's what you need to know if you are thinking of purchasing one . If you already have one , are you paying attention to how well it is still funded ? You could be in for a surprise if you have n't . Call your agent , and get an idea of how it 's doing for you , and how long you can expect it to be in force . Functionally , you can use the proceeds for everything that you would any other whole life insurance policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Life Insurance is a financial vehicles with many different uses . Some of the more common uses -LRB- functions -RRB- of life insurance are : Death Benefit to protect a loved one College Funding vehicle Buy-Sell Agreement for business owners Executive Bonus plans to compensate key employees or business owners Vehicle to create tax-free income in retirement Income replacement Charitable Giving Mortgage Protection Final Expense These are some of the highlights , but life insurance offers a combination of features and benefits that are not available in any other financial vehicle .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Januvia ?
Medicare covers Januvia by Medicare Part D , the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan . Januvia is an oral medication that helps lower blood sugar and prevent diabetic complications in people with type 2 diabetes . It is not indicated for persons with type 1 diabetes or those with diabetic ketoacidosis . The generic name for Januvia is sitagliptin .
Medicare covers Januvia by Medicare Part D , the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan . Januvia is an oral medication that helps lower blood sugar and prevent diabetic complications in people with type 2 diabetes . It is not indicated for persons with type 1 diabetes or those with diabetic ketoacidosis . The generic name for Januvia is sitagliptin .
Januvia is used to treat symptoms of diabetes . While it is possible Januvia would be used for someone in hospice , you do n't have to be terminal to have Januvia as a prescribed form of treatment . Check your Medicare Part D drug formulary to determine if Januvia is on the list and if so , what your copay would be .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not includeHPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not include HPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
Some things associated with vision are covered under Medicare and some are not . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . Even if you start out taking an routine eye exam and it is determined during the exam that you have eye conditions qualifying for Medicare funded treatment , only subsequent exams for those conditions will be covered . Medicare does cover glaucoma testing for those at risk for glaucoma due to certain conditions or family history . It will cover medically prescribed exams , testing , and treatments for eye conditions that result from illness or injury . Medicare does not cover eyeglasses . It will cover an IOL following a cataract surgery and eyeglass as a prosthesis during cataract surgery recovery .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare does not cover a routine eye exam just to check to see if your prescription has changed -LRB- refraction exam -RRB- . Medicare does not cover new glasses unless you have been prescribed new glasses after cataract surgery . Medicare will cover anything medically wrong with your eyes such as cataracts , glaucoma , macular degenerative disease , etc. . Medicare does not cover dental unless your teeth have been injured as a result of an accident .
Medigap is a supplemental health insurance policy that can be purchased to go along with Medicare Part A and Part B . It is used to cover the costs that Medicare does not cover . Medigap does not fit in with Medicaid as Medicaid covers all medical costs and does not have the `` gaps '' of coverage that Medicare does .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Get Health Insurance If I Am Obese ?
Under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- anyone that applies for health insurance will be accepted regardless of medical conditions . Being obese is no longer an issue in purchasing health insurance . You can purchase health insurance during the annual open enrollment period that begins around November 1st for January 1 , 2015 effective dates .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Yes , obese persons can get life insurance as long as they do not have any health conditions that cause them to be declined . There are policies out there even for obese persons with poor health . Several life insurance policies do not have any height and weight charts at all . Contact an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance to obtain a personalized quote for life insurance for persons who are overweight , obese , or morbidly obese .
That is an interesting question . I 've been an agent for many years , and I can speak from experience when I tell you that price is not based on color . I do not work with any companies -LRB- and I work with many -RRB- that would even consider breaking the law that way . That said , there are some things that come into play that might make you think -LRB- wrongly , I promise you -RRB- that It may cost more for African Americans . Life insurance costs are based in great part upon risk factors , including high blood pressure , diabetes , and obesity . These factors , along with heart disease are statistically common among all Americans , but much more so among African Americans . The American Heart Association in an article released last September suggests that a gene found in African Americans may be the cause for the highest rates of hypertension in the world . This disease is the leading cause of heart disease -LRB- # 1 killer of Americans -RRB- and strokes -LRB- # 4 killer -RRB- . Their article also outlines problems with obesity -LRB- 63 % of men , 77 % of women over 20 years old -RRB- among the community , as well as higher rates of diabetes -LRB- 2x as likely as whites to have it , among those 20 and older 15 % have the disease -RRB- . The US Dept. of Health and Human Services Office of Minority Health documents higher rates of cancers among the African American community in 2009 research , as well as higher mortality rates . Insurance companies are n't as concerned about the causes and reasons behind the statistics , as much as the heath issues of the applicants . If you are of any race , your rate will be higher if you suffer from diabetes or hypertension , especially if it has gone uncontrolled . The life expectancy of anyone with those issues is shortened , and so the companies bear more risk , and as a result charge more . The better the health , the cheaper the rates might be a simple way to put it , since the risk to the company determines the rate they will charge to insure you . If you smoke , expect to pay more . If you are overweight , expect to pay more . This will be true regardless of race , where you live , or the amount of coverage you apply for . I hope that this helps you understand how the industry works , and why it might seem like it is unfair . Thanks for asking !
I can give you some examples from cases I have handled . I think you will be surprised . Many people assume they will not qualify for life insurance , and happily , they are wrong . It takes a lot . One fellow needed to purchase several million dollars of life insurance to cover a bank loan for his business . His business was a bar/restaurant . The night before his insurance exam , a few of his buddies came by to socialize a bit . They did cocaine . Of course , he tested positive . No insurance for him . He probably would have qualified for a guaranteed-issue burial policy . But the $ 25,000 would not have done him any good . He needed that bank loan . And he needed life insurance to get it . And you know what ? He didnt get the life insurance , and he didnt get the bank loan . He would have had to wait a few years before he became eligible again . Five years is the industry standard , but I probably couldve gotten it for him sooner . Another candidate also a business owner went to rehab for both drug and alcohol addiction . Unfortunately , he didnt schedule the necessary follow-ups after his treatment . Carriers were worried that a relapse would be right around the corner without the proper support system in place . He will also have to wait a year or two . Then you have people who have a number of serious illnesses that just arent sufficiently controlled . The combination of obesity , heart condition , diabetes , smoking etc. is wicked . Ive had people come to me with these factors in place , and then some . Has to be some measure of control . Otherwise , you look like a walking timebomb . These cases are extreme . Other cases seem scary but can be quite placeable . Pot smoking ? You can get a policy . Bankruptcy ? You can get a policy . On probation for a felony ? You can get a policy . Suspended drivers license ? You can get a policy . Travel to India , or South America , or rural China ? You can get a policy . Mountain climber ? You can get a policy . Deep water scuba diver ? You can get a policy . Of course , a number of important factors need to be in place , but on the overall , it can be done . Surprise !
Most people can get life insurance when they are overweight . If your weight falls in the morbidly obese category , and if you are under age 45 , it is harder to find coverage than when you are older , but there are a few options . Those whose BMI -LRB- body mass index -RRB- is in the obese range will have more choices . Contrary to what generally applies to those with normal weight , sometimes a No Exam policy can be the least expensive choice for obese individuals . Not having to take an exam can also be helpful if the overweight person has not seen a doctor in a while , as it takes away the risk of the blood test showing high blood sugar , high cholesterol , or other labs sometimes associated with excess weight . No matter which route you go , consulting an agency that carries a variety of products can be helpful , so that you can be matched up with the one that has your best price . Do n't neglect to inform your agent of any weight lost in the past year , as most companies will add back half of that to your current weight , when determining your rate class .
Medicare will pay for lap band surgery if the patient 's BMI is over 35 , if the surgery has been deemed medically necessary due to other failed treatment , if there has been a psychological evaluation indicating that lap band surgery could be successful , and if the obesity has existed for some time . One of the keys as to whether Medicare will pay for lap band surgery is if there exists a health condition related to the patient 's obesity . If the obese individual is not suffering from sleep apnea , type 2 diabetes , hypertension , or other weight related conditions , Medicare will not pay for lap band surgery .
Most overweight people can get life insurance . If overweight or obese , they can usually get any amount and type of coverage they desire . If morbidly obese , there are simplified issue or guaranteed issue policies that have no weight limit at all ; however , they will have a low maximum face amount and only come in one or two types of coverage . Contact an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance to find your lowest price .
You can certainly be denied life insurance with some companies due to weight , but that does not mean you can not get life insurance at all . There are a handful of companies that do not ask any height or weight questions , so all that matters is that your health fits their guidelines . Whether overweight , obese , or morbidly obese , there are affordable overweight life insurance options out there if you look in the right places .
If you are moderately overweight , it will not affect your rate much at all . If you are obese , the policy may cost double or more of what a policy for those with `` prefect '' weight would be , but the price is still very affordable . Being morbidly obese can restrict your choices to No Exam policies that have higher prices . In any event , overweight persons can get life insurance , and using an agency that specializes in policies like that can save you hundreds of dollars .
Yes , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- , major medicalhealth insurance policies issued on or after January 1 , 2014 can not deny a person coverage and must cover any pre-existing health conditions immediately . This applies to both the individual and the group heath insurance markets . Therefore , height/weight tables can no longer be used for underwriting a policy and a person can not be declined for coverage for being obese . To be clear on this matter , the provisions I have described above apply to individual and group major medical policies . Short Term Medical policies are not subject to the provisions of the Affordable Care Act and these policies often have a screening question regarding the weight of the applicant and in the case of these specialty policies an applicant could be declined for coverage if they are obese .
Being extremely underweight , or extremely overweight , can cause you to be declined for medically underwritten life insurance . However , you can still get simplified issue , or guaranteed issue policies , in most cases . The face amount for this type of policy is usually capped at $ 25,000 but some allow you to take more . Some policies are graded ; others are not . Premiums are based on your age , so it is impossible to give a number here . They are not cheap , but by shopping we can sometimes find some surprisingly low rates for those who are morbidly obese . If obese or just overweight , you can usually find a medically underwritten policy . These will run higher than someone with perfect weight and perfect health , but sometimes run no more than the perfect health person whose father had a heart attack before age 65 . In other words , you just need to have a personal consultation with an agent -LRB- phone or email is OK -RRB- who specializes life insurance for those who have weight issues , and let them find your best price
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` Is buying term and investing the difference better than cash value life insurance ? '' Well , when I 'm looking at buying term and investing the difference , what am I investing it in ? And is that a risk area ? And if I 'm looking at permanent insurance , am I looking at guarantees and guaranteed returns ? Am I looking at using indexing ? Am I looking at risk-based insurance , like variable ? When I put those two together , I want to look at both of those plans and to see which one comes out the best . We have programs that we 've developed that will measure , is it better to buy term insurance and invest the difference in whatever product line you want to think of , whether it 's mutual funds or ETF 's . Or is it better to keep it inside a contract for the tax deferral and the possible tax-free income ? You can compare those things and always know which way to go with a simple program that will measure it for you . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Some Medicare patients will qualify for gastric bypass or lap band surgery . Your doctor must have certified that you are morbidly obese , other methods of weight loss have been tried and failed . Surgery should be considered based on your overall health . Morbid obesity is considered a disabling condition under Social Security , so some on SSDI may qualify for Medicare coverage if you are under the age of 65
As a general rule , a `` tummy tuck '' is viewed as cosmetic surgery and is not covered by health insurance polices . However , obesity is becoming an increasing problem in our nation.This has resulted in a growing number of people who have reached health or life threatening levels of morbid obesity for which they have had either prescription and/or surgical treatments that result in extreme weight loss . In some cases the weight gain has stretched the person 's skin to such an extent that after their extreme weight loss following treatment their skin does not return to normal levels and the person is left with folds of skin which can , in some cases , become sources of medical problems themselves -LRB- e.g. - severe rashes and infections -RRB- . In these extreme circumstances the insurance company may agree that it is an issue of medical necessity that this issue be surgically addressed and the will approve coverage for the removal or lifting of this excess skin tissue . This has been the only circumstance where I have seen an insurance carrier approve what might be construed as a tummy tuck .
Medicare will pay for gastric sleeve , gastric bypass , lap band , or duodenal switch for weight loss , under certain conditions . There must be a health problem associated with being obese , such as sleep apnea or type 2 diabetes . The condition of being overweight must have existed for at least 5 years . You must pass a psychological evaluation , have tried at least one other weight loss program that has failed , and other illnesses as the cause of your obesity must be ruled out . You also need a BMI of over 35 to be approved for Medicare gastric sleeve surgery .
Health insurance companies currently evaluate your height and weight and calculate your BMI -LRB- body metric index -RRB- to get an idea of your overall health . I have had clients that have had to pay a surcharge -LRB- additional premium -RRB- due to being overweight and several declined due to morbid obesity . I even had a client declined for being underweight . Excessive weight can lead to numerous physical and medical conditions . Some chronic , some life threatening . There is no such thing as a healthy fat person .
In some cases you may qualify for a covered gastric bypass under Medicare . Your doctor must attest that you are morbidly obese and other methods of weight loss have not been effective . Surgery can be an option if you are otherwise healthy enough to survive the surgery . If you are under 65 and morbidly obese you may qualify for SSDI and Medicare .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Does Renters Insurance Not Cover ?
A few of the exclusions under a typical renters insurance policy are : a. property covered by any scheduled insurance ; b. animals , insects , birds , fish , worms and bees ; c. motor vehicles including their parts and equipment ; d. motorized vehicles including their parts and equipment , except those vehicles currently operational and used to service the insured premises ; e. aircraft , including their tires , parts and equipment ; f. property of roomers and boarders who are not insureds ; g. trees , plants , shrubs and lawns ; They are covered under the Incidental Coverage of this form ; and h. farm personal property . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance will cover your personal property up to the limits of your policy . For example if you have $ 50,000 in personal property coverage in the policy and all your clothes and furniture were destroyed in the fire then you would be able to claim that as a loss . Renters Insurance only covers your personal property and does not cover the structure . It will also cover for losses for theft . Lets say you had your lap top from home in your car and someone broke in your car and stole the computer then you could file that as a claim on your renters insurance policy . Some renters insurance also covers for Loss of Use and Personal Property off premises . This may not be available from ever insurance carrier .
A renter 's policy is the same as a homeowner 's policy except that it does not cover the building itself . You should have largely the same expectations from a renter 's policy as you woulda homeowner 's policy . So in the event of a covered claim you could be compensated for your physical loss of possessionsas well asextra living expenses associated with having to move afterthe claim . Renter 's policies also provide liability coverage to you and your family . This is very broad coverage that could cover anything from slip and trip exposures around the house to certain misfortunes that happen away from home as well . Talk to your broker to find out everything a renter 's policy covers and what endorsements you need .
You really need to turn this one around and focus on what renters insurance does cover . Then , you can analyze your needs and interests in relation to what is covered and what is not and make your decisions accordingly . If you feel that you have a need for protection for something that does not appear to be covered in the policy , you might be able to add it through an endorsement , for an additional sum of money . An independent local agent can help you with this type of assessment . I think you will find that renters insurance coverage is fairly broad for many typical loss types in relation to renting , including often overlooked but very important liability coverage .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
Yes an apartment complex can require you to obtain renters insurance as a condition of renting their apartment . What apartments are concerned about is liability protection . Should the tenant be liable for bodily injury or property damage the apartment complex does not want to be the first in line to be sued for something the tenant caused . Instead the tenants renters insurance policy will defend against the loss first . The apartment complex will not care if you chose to carry coverage for your own personal property . Also on a side note if the tenant did not carry renters insurance and was sued for a loss , just because the apartment complex may have to defend does not give a free pass to the tenant . Your still going to court and it can cost you thousands . Renters insurance is very inexpensive and covers you for so much . Buy it .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Is Universal Life Insurance Bad ?
No product is bad it just depends on what your needs are . What you are trying to cover or accomplish , It might be bad for you , if you are looking for more guarantees . Universal life policies involve you managing the policy . If you can not find your policy then you should not have a policy you need to manage . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
That is a great question ! I believe that any life insurance is better than no life insurance , so even a universal policy can be a good thing . That said , am I a big fan of them ? No , I 'm not , and here 's why . Term and whole life policies are very simple , straight forward policies . You pay a set premium , at set times , and the end date is clearly defined as the end of the term , or when you pass . Universal policies are not so clear , and often lead to trouble for the buyer , if they are not clearly shown what has to happen for this type of policy to work . There are many moving parts , and this type of policy is not one that you can buy and throw into your drawer and forget about , unless you like surprises . If you would like to see if this policy would be a good fit for you , please feel free to contact me , and we 'll go over it . Thanks for asking !
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Why is whole life insurance bad ? Because I have something else to sell you or I have n't actually reviewed whole life because I am too lazy to learn about it as a product . Or my favorite , since the IRS created the MEC provision back in the 80 's which created a situation that if you put too much money into a policy , the tax advantages changed . Up until then , your local neighborhood stock broker would sell you life insurance as an investment as it 's qualities were very attractive to investors . Besides common sense tells me that insurance companies price their products based on the risk they bear providing insurance in every and I mean EVERY product they sell . Why would whole life be different ? Why would it be the `` only '' product witha higher price that is `` bad '' for the insured ?
Whole Life Insurance is GOOD ! It 's not bad ! In fact it 's NEVER bad ! I like what Larry said above here ... `` Whole Life is bad because I want to sell you something else '' ... which in fact is an illegal practice called `` twisting '' . So if that 's the case and the reason you asked this question you should tell the person that told you whole life is bad that you 're thinking of reporting them to the Insurance Commissioner ! Even when people have money enough to provide their families with a comfortable lifestyle for generations they still buy whole life insurance . There are many reasons why , including the guaranteed , tax-free growth of wealth .
There are many past universal life policy holders who consider it to be bad because they have been burned by universal life . Most often , this occurred because the projected interest rate for the policy was unrealistically high . This caused their policies to lapse much sooner than expected . Since then , some universal life policies now offer a guaranteed minimum interest rate and maximum COI -LRB- cost of insurance -RRB- . However long your policy is shown to last with those variables is how long your policy is guaranteed to not lapse . In my opinion , universal life insurance is not bad as long as consumers understand the guarantees , or lack thereof .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
Think of it as apples and fruit . Universal is a type ofpermanent life insurance . But there are other types of permanent life insurance . Whole life is another type of permanent life insurance . Whole life is a fixed product , whose premium never varies , and whose value increases over time , based on the carrier 's investments in your fixed account . Universal is permanent , and will never end , so long as you continue to pay , unlike term whose premiums will increase after the end of a fixed term . However , with universal , the policy value may go up or may go down , based on whatever it is pegged to reflect . It is possible with universal that you may have to put more money in that expected , if the market were to take a serious hit . This would not happen with whole life . A way to avoid this is to buy indexed universal life . It allows the policy to grow with the market , but at a somewhat lower rate , but it prevents the policy to lose money when the market goes down , as it locks in the balance annually . Over time , this actually can give you a better return than a standard universal , even in an overall good market , not just a bad one . Talk to your agent . Thank you . GARY LANE .
The best thing about a Universal Life policy is its `` flexibility '' . . The worst thing about a Universal Life policy is its `` flexibility . Your life insurance agent and you should be able to see the two important parts of the policy . First , the cost of the life insurance over the life of the policy . Most people buy and Universal Life policy because it is permanent . You should understand how you will be paying for the death benefit and what fees are associated with the insurance . The second part of the policy is the cash values . These cash values are affected by the current , guaranteed , and projected interest rates . The Illustration from the agent should contain projections of cash value based on any or all three types of interest rates . Universal Life policies are bad when the cost of insurance is too high or the cash value has inflated interest projections that cause the policy lapse or fail . If you have a Universal Life policy , you should review it annually with your life insurance agent .
Permanent life insurance is NOT bad ! There are a number of different types of `` permanent '' life insurance and some are better than others depending on your goals and needs . What is bad is when sales people misrepresent the policy they are selling ! Permanent insurance includes Whole Life , Universal Life , and the variations of Universal such as Indexed , variable and variable indexed . Variable basically means that it 's tied to the stock market . Indexed basically means that it 's tied to a particular `` index '' such as the S&P 500 . Whole Life is the only one with Guaranteed Premiums , Cash Value growth and Death Benefit with no downside risk .
That is a great question ! If you are living in one of the Northern States where snowmobiles can see some use , it 's a good bet that you 'll be required to have some insurance coverage . There are a few really good reasons why it makes sense to get a policy . The first is that any damages or personal injuries that might occur on your property as a rule wo n't be covered by your homeowners policy . If something bad were to happen , you would be left unprotected for the liabilities of costs and damages . Your snowmobile -LRB- and trailer , if you have one -RRB- wo n't be covered under your auto policy either . So again , you would be liable for any damages if something bad were to happen . So what should you purchase ? I 'd strongly recommend the same kind of coverage that you 'd buy for your car - full coverage with comprehensive , collision , and liability . Here 's why - collision is obvious , if you run into something , or roll your sled , it will be covered by this part of the policy . The comprehensive portion covers the other stuff - hitting a deer , water damage busting thru ice , etc. . The liability part covers you for damage to riders , or property . You can add trailers to your policy coverage with some carriers , and that makes sense , as it 's cheap , and does n't get covered by most auto coverage . Sled policies are generally fairly inexpensive , and often can be discounted with multiple sleds , proof of training classes , and bundling with other policies . Most will not charge for non-use periods also . I 'd say it 's definitely something to have before you ever get on your sled , okay ? -LRB- I love this question , I 'm from up North originally myself , and do n't get to answer too many of these type questions here in Texas ! -RRB- Be safe , have fun , and thanks for asking !
That is an excellent question ! As with most things , you have to look at them carefully , and see how they are best meant to be used . In most cases , the people that will talk the worst about that thing will have either misunderstood it , or not used it correctly . Because it did n't do as they expected , they talk bad about it , and give it a bad reputation . Annuities are a complex investment vehicle , and are not the best investment for everyone . Many people have learned this the wrong way , either because they did not understand what they were purchasing , or because it was not clearly explained to them . Some folks will disparage another form of investment if what they are trying to sell you pays them a salary , or a commission . It 's along the lines of the question '' Ever wonder why your stock broker/mutual fund manager drives a better car than you do , if he 's working with your money '' ? Annuities can be excellent retirement vehicles if they are the right vehicle for you . They can be very safe , and can provide a secure source of income . So if there is a bad reputation to them , it derives from being misinformed , or misused , and not because of the product itself . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
Universal Life Insurance is not a bad idea , unless it is not a suitable product for your need . Universal Life can be a good solution for those who want permanent coverage with low cash value and at the lowest possible price . Because it is flexible , Universal Life is also a good `` lifetime '' plan that can be adjusted to suit each stage of life . Universal Life policies of the past we sold with projections of unsustainable interest rates , and caused many people a lot of grief when they lapsed far before anticipated . So it is important to purchase UL with your eyes wide open , and having guarantees down in writing .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why are equity indexed annuities bad ? I did n't know they were ? Sometimes you have to look at the source of where the words `` bad '' come from . Sometimes these type of statements are made as a sales pitch for other products from books to competitive financial products . Equity Index Annuities are fine in the right situation with the proper amount of over sight or review as time goes on .
Why do annuities have such a bad reputation ? Think of it in the same way people view certain breeds of dogs . Is it the dog that is truly bad or the owner who 's made it that way ? Annuities are a fine product that can work very well for most people with a variety of needs . Where problems occur is when the details inside the annuity are n't explained clearly and the fit is n't really right for the customer .
I 'll add a bit to what Jeff has said because he made a very important point about Universal Life , that it 's a hybrid of whole life and term . Both whole life and Universal Life build cash value and have a separate portion that 's purely death benefit , but they differ greatly in how they operate internally . I 'll follow with explaining this difference . I 'm going to speak somewhat generally , so do n't kill me if a particular company 's product behaves a little differently . Whole Life - The internal cost of insurance is averaged over your life expectancy and stays the same year after year . Therefore , every year , the same amount of money goes toward the cost of insurance . The remainder goes to the cash account which grows by the insurance company adding money , or dividends , to the account . These dividends are set by the company based on the performance of it 's investments . It can change every year but most companies will guarantee a certain dividend . Premiums are level throughout the life of the policy and , if you pay your premium , your policy is guaranteed to be there for you . Universal Life - The internal cost of insurance increases every year based on your age just like term insurance does . The remainder goes into a cash account that the insurance company adds to as interest . This interest rate is also tied to the performance of their investments and will change from year to year . This means that , at the beginning of the policy , the internal cost of insurance is the lowest it will ever be and will increase every year . Premiums are flexible with a minimum amount due to cover expenses and the cost of insurance . Remainder goes into the cash account . There good and bad with both . With Whole life , your premiums will usually start out higher than with Universal , but they 'll never change and your policy is guaranteed to be there as long as you pay the premium . With Universal Life , the minimum premium will be much lower at inception but will increase every year as the cost insurance rises . This makes it extremely important to pay a target premium or more with universal life . That way , more money goes into the cash account to earn interest and offset cost of insurance increases as you get older . You can put more into the cash account and , therefore , it can grow more quickly , but there 's a flip side to that also . if you underfund it , the increasing cost of insurance can eat up all the cash value in later years and leave you with no cash and no death benefit . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and go through the entire process so he/she can put together the right program for you and your family .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Long Will Medicare Pay For A SNF ?
Original Medicare includes coverage as an inpatient in a SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- . If you qualify for coverage , Medicare will cover the full cost of care for up to 20 days . For days 21 through 100 , Medicare will pay a portion of the cost and you will be responsible for a daily copay . -LRB- $ 148 in 2013 -RRB-
Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met ; days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 152 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Qualifications to receive the Medicare SNF benefit : 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Although a Medicare plan may cover SNF copayments , given the qualification restrictions for the Medicare SNF benefit , Medicare beneficiaries should consider separate Short Term Care nursing facility coverage to manage the financial risk of an uncovered SNF stay .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Medicare does not offer long term care insurance or pay for assisted living long term care needs . Medicare may cover treatment in a SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- if you meet the qualifications . Normally you must be admitted to the SNF following a qualified stay in a hospital -LRB- usually 3 days or longer -RRB- and must be discharged to the care of the SNF .
Medicare Part A will pay for a SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- stay but only under certain conditions . You must first have a hospital inpatient stay of at least 3 days as an inpatient . Following that your doctor must indicate you need additional nursing care in a SNF environment . You must be discharged from the hospital to the SNF before Medicare will pay .
Nursing home care is covered by Medicare in some circumstances . 1 . You must stay in a Medicare certified skilled nursing facility . 2 . You must enter the nursing home after a qualified inpatient hospital stay of at least three consecutive days -LRB- starting with the day you enter the hospital , not counting the day you leave -RRB- . 3 . You must enter the SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- within 30 days . 4 . Your doctor must have ordered the SNF stay due to your need for more than custodial care on a daily basis , and the SNF care must be for something treated during the qualifying hospital stay . 5 . Medicare Part A pays for up to 100 days of nursing home coverage .
Treatment in a Skilled Nursing Facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- may be covered by Medicare under certain conditions . You must have been admitted to the SNF following a qualified stay in a hospital -LRB- usually 3 days or more -RRB- and discharged to the SNF . Your doctor must certify that you need nursing care for a condition related to your hospitalization .
Medicare Part B will cover care and treatment in a SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- in some situations . You must be admitted to the SNF following a qualified hospital inpatient stay -LRB- usually 3 days or longer -RRB- and be discharged to the SNF . Your treatment must be medically necessary , not respite care or assisted living .
Medicare will pay up to 100 days of nursing home stay when the need for skilled care is ordered by a doctor , when it follows a qualifying hospital stay of at least consecutive three days , when the care in the skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- is for the condition for which the person was hospitalized , when the SNF is Medicare certified , and a few other conditions .
Medicare Part B will cover treatment and inpatient stays in a SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- but only under specific circumstances . You must have had a qualified stay in a hospital lasting 3 days or longer and must have been discharged to the SNF . Medicare covers medically necessary treatment but does not cover custodial or respite care .
Medigap plans are a supplement to original Medicare . Any Part A or Part B claim approved by Medicare is covered by Medigap -LRB- subject to your plan deductible , coinsurance and copay if any -RRB- . Long term care is generally not covered by Medicare and would not be covered by Medigap . In some situations Medicare will pay for a stay in a SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- or rehab unit .
Medigap Plan N is one of ten standardized plans offers coverage in addition to the standard benefits provided by other Medicare Supplement plans . It is most simiiar to Medigap Plan D , with two major exceptions . With N , you are responsible for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do n't result in inpatient admission before your Part B coverage being paying expenses at 100 % . Basic benefits offered by Plan N include : Medicare Part A hospital coinsurance and other costs up to an additional 365 days after Original Medicare benefits are exhausted Medicare Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayments -LRB- except for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do not result in inpatient care -RRB- First three pints of blood used in a medical procedure Plan N also offers the following additional benefits : Skilled Nursing Facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign travel emergency care -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- When available , many consumers find they can save $ 50 per month or more when compared to the more popular Plan F . If your doctor accepts Medicare assignment as payment in full , and you do not see your physician more than twice per month , Plan N can be a great way to lower your overall health care expenses .
Original Medicare includes coverage as an inpatient in a SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- . If you qualify for coverage , Medicare will cover the full cost of care for up to 20 days . For days 21 through 100 , Medicare will pay a portion of the cost and you will be responsible for a daily copay . -LRB- $ 148 in 2013 -RRB-
Medicare offers limited care for treatment in a skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- or nursing home . You must have a medical need for being in the home . Admittance to the nursing home must follow a qualified stay -LRB- at least 3 days -RRB- as an inpatient in a hospital . If Medicare approves your claim your Medicare supplement policy will pay their portion of the approved claim .
Medicare HIB is Medicare Part A which the beneficiary is entitled to due to ESRD -LRB- end stage renal disease -RRB- . Part A is hospital coverage and entitles you to full inpatient coverage for Medicare approved treatment and claims . Under some situations you are also entitled to treatment in a SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- , rehab and hospice services .
Medicare will cover some aspects of Alzheimer 's care . It depends on many situations . Diagnosis and doctor treatment should be a covered expense under Medicare . Prescription drugs designed to treat Alzheimer 's may be covered under your Medicare Part D . In patient care in a hospital or SNF may also be a covered expense as well as rehab and hospice . Your doctor is in a position to advise you on these items .
Medigap plan C covers essentially everything included in Medigap plan F. Plan C covers your Medicare Part A and Part B deductibles and coinsurance , benefits for SNF -LRB- skilled nursing facility -RRB- and foreign travel . Plan C does not cover Medicare excess charges . Very few carriers offer plan C and I have not found it to be competitive in Georgia .
When someone has been prescribed medially necessary skilled nursing , here is what is covered -LRB- when provided by a Medicare approved provider -RRB- : 1 . Semi-private Room -LRB- a room you share with other patients -RRB- 2 . Meals 3 . Skilled Nursing Care 4 . Physical Therapy * 4 . Occupational Therapy * 5 . Speech-Language Pathology Services * 6 . Medical Social Services 7 . Medications 8 . Medical Supplies and Equipment Used in Facility 9 . Ambulance Transportation -LRB- when other transportation endangers health -RRB- to the nearest supplier of needed services that arent available at the SNF 10 . Dietary Counseling * If prescribed to meet your health goals
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Renters ?
If someone is paying you to live in one or more rooms of the home that you occupy and insure , most homeowners policies exclude coverage on their personal property . The person renting from you certainly hasnt a legal ground for coverage . The renter can purchase an individual renters policy to provide coverage for their own personal property .
A Homeowners '' Insurance policy form specifically provides coverage provided that the property is the primary residence of the named insured and property owner . Thus , if you decide to live elsewhere and rent your property , your Homeowners policy might not provide any coverage for you should anything occur . It would not under any circumstances provide coverage for your tenants . Best to discuss this with your Insurance Professional .
Renters Insurance in the US is an outgrowth of the regular Homeowners Insurance policies that have been in use in many states since the mid 20th Century . In fact for many companies the forms in use continue to be variations -LRB- with appropriate state approvals -RRB- of forms developed by the Insurance Service Office , ISO . The Insurance Service Office is not alone in developing contractual homeowners and subsequently renters policy forms in use in the various states . There are other product development groups and larger companies often develop their own product offerings . With all that said , there are some common elements to homeowner and renters policy and by far the use of annual -LRB- 12 month terms predominates -RRB- . Decades ago there were companies using forms that lasted as much as three years for homeowners , but the reality of getting appropriate approvals from the regulators , responding to loss results and getting mortgage companies to accept the policies has all led to a fairly standardized approach in the US that homeowners and renters policies are primarily annual contracts . But do n't throw away all your old policies when you get to the end of a year if you are all aware of an event that might give rise to coverage during that time period . For example suppose during the term of your renters policy your dog bit a neighbor . That occurrence then would be associated with the payment of loss for the infliction of bodily injury even though the damage is only assessed completely for years to come . Her is why I mention dog bites . In many states you have absolute liability for your dog 's aggression . And , dogs who maul a victim are often attacking children -LRB- easier prey to the dog -RRB- and the damages are usually to the child 's head . Therefore as they age there can be a need for repeated surgeries to address the scaring . Since the renters policy is typically an occurrence policy , the policy which will respond is not the current insurer several years out , but the insurer at the time of the event or '' occurrence ''
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
A renter 's policy is the same as a homeowner 's policy except that it does not cover the building itself . You should have largely the same expectations from a renter 's policy as you woulda homeowner 's policy . So in the event of a covered claim you could be compensated for your physical loss of possessionsas well asextra living expenses associated with having to move afterthe claim . Renter 's policies also provide liability coverage to you and your family . This is very broad coverage that could cover anything from slip and trip exposures around the house to certain misfortunes that happen away from home as well . Talk to your broker to find out everything a renter 's policy covers and what endorsements you need .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
Renters insurance is definitely cheaper than homeowners insurance . The reason is that renters insurance covers almost everything covered by your homeowners policy except coverage A or the dwelling . The dwelling is covered by the Landlord and the content , liability , medical payment and loss or uses is covered by the tenant . A homeowners policy will cover all these plus the structure and that is why it cost most .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
The entity that is renting the property to the ` renter or renters ' is typically the homeowner policyholder . It could be an organization , corporation or individual who holds the homeowner policy . The owner of the residence pays for their own policy . They are the ` landlord ' in common terms . The renter may be required by the owner , to carry a renter 's insurance policy but the two policies are different . Even if the renter is not required to have a renter 's policy , it is a wise move to purchase one , as the premiums are usually relatively low and the coverages are fairly extensive , primarily for losses and damages to personal property and also for liability coverage for accidental injury to others .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover The House ?
If you are renting a house , the renters insurance that you purchase may cover damage to the house for which you are held liable under the liabnilty protection portion of your policy . For example , if say you use a faulty extension cord that is found to be the cause of a fire which damages the house , then your loiability coverage wil be used to pay for those damages . Remember to be sure to have enough liability protection ion your renters ' poplicy . Most folks focus on having enough presonal property coverage to protect the things they own . Remember that if you do anything to damage your rental home or unit , you are responsible for the repair of those damages .
Renters insurance will not typically cover the building structure that you are renting . This type of insurance typically provides liablity coverage , coverage for your personal property , and some loss of use coverage . Please remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage porvided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
Renters insurance is for renters of homes and apartments as house insurance is for those who own the house . Renters insurance protects YOUR property if there is a loss from say a fire . The biggest issue is what kind of policy you have . Does your insurance give yoy replacement cost or just current value . There is a big difference . Think about what you stuff costs today versus purchasing brand new .
That depends upon two things really . First , the type of housing you are in and second the terms and conditoins of your parents ' Homeowners Insurance policy . Let 's talk about the second one first . If your Insurance Professional advises you that your parents ' Homeowners ' policy provides extended coverage that is adiquate to cover your personal belongings in an on campus dorm , then in that case , it is not critical that you obtain a separate renters insurance policy . If the Homeowners policy does not provide this extension or , more commonly , if you are housed in off campus rental unit or house , then obtaining a renters insurance policy would not only be smart , it may also be required by the buildng owner or management company from whom you are renting .
Great question ! Renters insurance is a good way to protect you from loss . If your rented home burns down , the landlords insurance covers his loss of the house , but not your things in the house when it burned . Renters insurance covers your investment in those things . If a burgler kicks in your apartment door , and steals all of your stuff , the complex 's insurance will cover only the cost of repairing the door . Unless you 've got a ton of money laying around to replace all of the things that were stolen , you 're out of luck . A good renters policy will help you get those things replaced . Look for a policy that offers `` replacement cost '' if possible . If you would like more information , please hit the contact me button , I 'd be glad to help . Thanks for asking !
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
A renter 's policy is the same as a homeowner 's policy except that it does not cover the building itself . You should have largely the same expectations from a renter 's policy as you woulda homeowner 's policy . So in the event of a covered claim you could be compensated for your physical loss of possessionsas well asextra living expenses associated with having to move afterthe claim . Renter 's policies also provide liability coverage to you and your family . This is very broad coverage that could cover anything from slip and trip exposures around the house to certain misfortunes that happen away from home as well . Talk to your broker to find out everything a renter 's policy covers and what endorsements you need .
The answer is typically yes , but there are some Caveats > The typical renters policy is based on the ISO , Insurance Service Office developed HO 4 policy . So in effect a renters policy is more or less a homeowners policy without the house . Renters policies typically have a Section Two Liability Coverage which you review as to the limit of coverage and if there any significant restriction . Since dog bites are increasingly a major frequency issue for insurers , some have taken the position of carving out a restriction of coverage if certain dogs , dog breeds or size does not meet their standards . In Canada their are some Provinces have determined certain breeds to be against public policy and while they have not gone to putting down any dog of those breeds , but have taken the position that no new dog of certain breeds can be housed in that Province .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
Renters Insurance is available for tenants in all States . Renters Insurance Policies cover personal property , additional living expenses , personal liability and medical payments to others . Renters Insurance can be purchased by tenants renting houses , apartment units , condos and townhomes . Renters Insurance is transferrable from one rental unit to another when the insured moves ; however , it is not transferrable across State lines since policies need to be rewritten according to State Department of Insurance regulations which are different in each State . Stillwater Insurance Group offers the most affordable options for renters ; there is also an online self service renters insurance platform available directly for clients ' use : WEBSITELINK Using the above link , you may obtain a free quote and purchase your insurance contract directly online . For further questions regarding any details , you may contact a licensed representative at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 .
If you are renting a house , the renters insurance that you purchase may cover damage to the house for which you are held liable under the liabnilty protection portion of your policy . For example , if say you use a faulty extension cord that is found to be the cause of a fire which damages the house , then your loiability coverage wil be used to pay for those damages . Remember to be sure to have enough liability protection ion your renters ' poplicy . Most folks focus on having enough presonal property coverage to protect the things they own . Remember that if you do anything to damage your rental home or unit , you are responsible for the repair of those damages .
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
When a financial institution pays off the previous owner of your house , they have an investment to protect . After all , it was the lender 's money that allowed you to `` own '' your house . As a result of the lender paying on your behalf , there is a conditional pledge of the property to the bank or lender for your obligation to repay the debt . If something were to happen to the house such as a fire , the value of the house would be significantly impaired and the lender could be left without re-payment of the loan and no house to sell due to the damage . Therefore , the lender is seeking assurance that if there is damage to the house in which he has a financial interest , he can recover his investment .
If you own your house you need a homeowners policy because Renters insurance does not cover the dwelling . Part of your homeowners policy is personal property coverage which covers your personal belongings any where in the world . Coverage is limited to 10 % of your personal property limit if a claim occurs away from your home . For example , you are traveling on vacation and your luggage is stolen . Your house is insured for $ 500,000 and you have $ 350,000 personal property coverage . You will have coverage up to $ 35,000 for your stolen luggage .
A landlord at their discretion can require renters insurance as part of the rental agreement . If you do not wish to purchase renters insurance you have the right to look for housing from a landlord who does not have this requirement . The landlord is not breaking any laws by making renters insurance a requirement of the rental agreement .
Renters insurance does indeed cover your personal property . However , there are many other components of a renter 's policy . For example , in the event of a covered claim -LRB- fire or tornado are two common ones -RRB- , your living expenses away from your house or apartment will be covered -LRB- subject to policy limits -RRB- . So , semantically , they are nearly the same , but there are differences in the specific benefits .
end question
start question
annuities
When Did Annuities Start ?
All annuities have a policy date . That is usually the date that funds are accepted by the insurance company . Money can be withdrawn from an annuity in several ways which would give rise to several other dates . If there will be regular installments for a period of time , which would create a different date . If a lifetime income is desired there would be the start date for that , which could be the same as the policy date on an immediate annuity . The start date for a lifetime income becomes a date that ends all further choices .
When did annuities start ? Well they can be traced back to Roman times . Know as annua , people made a one time payment and then collected a payout every year there after . During the 17th century governments issued annuities to underwrite the many wars they were in . People provided money now to the government with the promise of a later payout over many years .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
The annuity starting date is the date that the annuity is `` annuitized '' , or starts making payments to the beneficiary of the annuity . Immediate annuities will have a starting date right after the purchase of the annuity . Deferred annuities will have a mandatory start date years down the road , as determined by the contract established between the annuity company and the person purchasing the annuity . However , the annuity owner can choose to annuitize at any time prior to the start date , although it is best to delay until after the surrender period .
That is a great question ! There are a lot ! Simply put , there are two categories of annuities . One you plunk down your cash , and it immediately begins paying out your monthly payments , These are called `` immediate annuities '' . The other type takes your cash , and holds it , or `` defers '' the payments for a number of years before paying those monthly payouts . These are called `` deferred annuities '' . There are several different types of these , but again very simply , there are `` fixed annuities '' , that pay a set interest rate , there are `` indexed annuities '' , that pay interest rates that are based on the movements of a market , like the S&P 500 , or the Dow Jones . There are also `` variable annuities '' , that pay according to how well the investments within the annuity did -LRB- or did n't -RRB- do . That is a basic look at the types of annuities , I hope that helped . Please feel free to drop me a line if you 'd like more details , ok ? Thanks for asking !
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
How much auto insurance is enough ? I once heard a story from a gentleman that may answer your question . He told me about an accident he had when he was younger . At the time of the accident he did n't own much and had very little in savings , so he was taking a chance by owning and driving a car without insurance . He figured sice he did n't own much and since the car was an old oil burner , he did n't need it . Then one day he was in a hurry and was trying to beat a yellow traffic light before it changed to red , when he clipped the front end of another car coming through the intersection in front of him . He said that when he came to , he checked himself out , then searched for the other driver . When he found that both he and the other driver were uninjured , he was thrilled . As he looked around more closely he found himself inside a building specifically a liquor store and was right in the middle of the Scotch aisle . When the dust settled the other driver had claimed only $ 15,000 to replace his car ... . but the store owner sued him for over $ 500,000 in damages to his store and contents . The judge awarded a total of $ 515,000 in a damage award and the old gentleman told me he was still working to pay off the judgement now 10 years later . The answer to your question is buy as much coverage as you can afford . Do n't be fooled by some auto insurace brokers when they try to sell you the state minimums as you could be paying for that cheap policy in the years to come !
The single premium immediate annuity is the policy from which every other annuity begins . This policy pays a lifetime steam of income in exchange for a lump sum of money . The first alteration was the deferred annuity where the payments did not start within a year but were deferred until later ; these usually allow you to contribute more to the annuity . Then there is the issue of where the money in the annuity is invested . Some are in company funds , some are in separate accounts and some are hands-on investments where the annuitant directs the investments . There are variations of these basic plans that appeal to some people and meet specific needs .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
The issue comes down to the famous question , `` what did he know and when did he know it ? '' followed by `` what did he do about it ? '' If Your neighbor knew about the condition of the tree , and that can be documented , and then did nothing to remove the tree or it 's damaged parts , then if it fell and caused damage to your car , your neighbor would be legally liable for that damage . The liability portion of his Homeowners ' policy would provide coverage for such a loss as a result of his negligence .
What happens to an annuity upon death depends on the type of annuity you have and the contractual stipulations . If you have an annuity that was set up to pay out for the rest of your life , there may be not benefit paid upon your death . Some Life Annuities will return what was paid in or pay for a guaranteed number of years . A Joint with Last Survivor Annuity will continue payments to the spouse . For annuities that will are set up to pay a fixed number of years , annuity payments will continue to the beneficiaries just as if they did before . If the annuity was not yet annuitized , the proceeds must be received by the beneficiaries within 5 years . Contact your agent or the company through which your annuity was secured to understand the specifics about your particular contract .
This is a very common question . The answer is yes . Let me give you an example of what one of my clients did . It was very thoughtful . My client is a woman in her 30s . She is very devoted to her mother , who is in her 60s . Her mother took great care of her when she was growing up , and now she wanted to pay your mother back . She makes sure her mother lacks for nothing . She bought her a house , and pays her monthly bills . She bought her a car . She treats her to vacations . Her whole attitude is that my mother took great care of me , and now that I have the money , Im going to take great care of her . Of course , all the money she is spending now on her mother , is money she can not spend on herself and her own future . She is basically depleting her retirement fund for her mothers care . She came to me and basically said that she would like to get reimbursed at some point for the money she is spending on her mother . She will happily provide for her mother as long as a mother is alive ; however , when she dies , she would like to have an insurance benefit paid to her to replenish her own retirement fund . The goal was to get a life insurance company to offer a policy on her mother for that reason . And I did it . It took some digging , but I did find a life insurance company to buy into that concept . They did set a limit on the face amount , but it was reasonable as far as what my client wanted to accomplish . Certainly a win-win situation .
When did annuities start ? Well they can be traced back to Roman times . Know as annua , people made a one time payment and then collected a payout every year there after . During the 17th century governments issued annuities to underwrite the many wars they were in . People provided money now to the government with the promise of a later payout over many years .
Most companies will have a medical question referring to it or similar . Had a customer black out due to low blood sugar and carrier was refusing to pay due to disclosure failure . Had another customer who was blind in one eye . That carrier did not have a medical question about that -LRB- only diabetes -RRB- . customer never had a wreck with the good eye ... can not say the same for the other . He said it was not his fault he did not see it coming -LRB- did not turn his neck far around enough to look -- carrier did pay . Usually if the car is adapted for a disability no problem . They have not figured out how to adapt for blackouts for high or low sugar.Did have one customer upset that a carrier would not insure her , she explained that she only had seizures at night and saw no reason why she could not drive in the daytime .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What is it ??? A RIP OFF ... usually . If you trigger a benefit , the payout goes to the `` lender '' ... NOT your family . Do n't get in the position to where you have to ask if it 's good or not ... BUY disability & life insurance NOW ... You will die one day . . Yet along the way you are most likely to suffer a disability or critical illness that puts you out of work for months , or years , before you pass away form the situation . If you pass away at all form it . If you have a tight budget , there are plans available in many states that are a Life/Disability/Critical Illness `` All in one Policy '' . It is most often better to have standalone plans -LRB- better benefits for disability & critical -RRB- , yet the all helps cover all your bases to SOME LEVEL ... I remember when I played High School basket ball & the very first Air Jordan 's came out . EVERY KID wanted them . Yet my family could n't afford them . Did I give up , quit the team , all because I did n't have `` Air Jordan 's '' ... NO . My parents bought `` something '' ... & I STILLWAS A STARTING FORWARD my senior year . Point is ... when you need insurance , get something even if what you WANT is n't within reach . Only buy Credit `` whatever '' if you have no other means of securing standalone individual life/disability/critical insurance . - gravy
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Yes you can . It is called Short Term Medical -LRB- STM -RRB- and it is available in most states . It allows you to purchase a STM policy for , usually , up to 6 months . After that you can usually apply for 6 more months if you still qualify . You can choose a plan for a little as 30 days and you can not have other insurance in place during the time you will have your STM in place . STM does not cover pre-existing conditions . It only covers you for what happens from the date your plan starts to the date your plan ends and therefore it costs a lot less than a traditional plan . Remember they do not have to renew your plan if you ended up using your plan for something significant , health wise . STM is a great plan for healthy adults whom have 6 months left before turning 65 . It has saved a lot of my healthy clients money during those 6 months before Medicare kicks in . It 's a great plan for those in between jobs who ca n't afford the high cost of COBRA and for those whom start a new job and have a 30-60 day waiting period before their new companies insurance kicks in . Remember , it does NOT cover pre-existing such as a hernia you got diagnosed over a year ago but did n't do something about then that ruptures during your STM plan period . I just signed up a 21 year old for one month in Oregon and the cost for a $ 500 deductible , 80/20 plan was only $ 60 including the $ 20 one time enrollment fee . You can view a few plan options here for Oregon and Assurant , which is available in most States . www.coveroregon.cc Click on Products at the top of the page and then scroll down and on the right hand side it will say Short Term Medical ; to give you an idea of rates . Make sure to click on Assurant for rates outside of Oregon . Short Term Medical is a great option for those whom did not sign up during Open Enrollment and are healthy , just looking to be protected from an accident , emergency room visit , unexpected illness , spider bite , etc. .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Medicaid Take Your Life Insurance ?
Generally it depends on what situation you are in . ie , If you are in a nursing home because of the expense that is occur on a daily basis they usually have you do a financial intake form where it ask you various questions to determine assistance and because Life insurance is an asset sometimes depending on the state will ask you to cash out insurance policies especially if you are the owner of the policy .
When you go through a spend down process to apply for Medicaid , they will look at your assets . Term Life Insurance does not have a cash value , so is not considered an asset . Cash value life insurance is allowed to have a certain face amount , and if it is under that , you can keep it . If it is higher than the allowable limit , you may have more choices than just cashing it in and using it for your skilled care expenses -LRB- note : Medicaid does not just take your policy away -RRB- . You can possibly assign the policy to a funeral home for your final expenses . Or you may be able to keep part of the death benefit and use the rest to help pay for nursing home costs under the Long Term Care Benefit Plan . Your social worker should help you find the option that works best for your welfare . If you foresee going on Medicaid in the distant future , you may want to consider transferring ownership of your cash value life insurance to someone else . This must be done years ahead of time , or it will still be called an nonexempt asset .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Medicaid does n't actually `` take '' your life insurance . You just ca n't qualify for Medicaid assistance if you have more countable assets than Medicaid allows . In most states $ 2,000 is the total allowed to qualify for Medicaid assistance . Checking and savings accounts , retirement money , cash value of life insurance , etc. all count against you when qualifying for Medicaid . Many people will cash surrender their life insurance to qualify for Medicaid . You can also irrevocably assign it to your funeral home and it will be exempt but must be all used for funeral expenses if you do that . An actual funeral preplan life insurance policy that you purchase from a funeral home is always exempt from Medicaid .
Typically , Medicaid can not take your life insurance policy . If you have a large cash value policy , such as whole life insurance or universal life insurance , the cash value is considered an asset and could keep you from qualifying for Medicaid , but they can not take your policy away . The policy you own is a contract between you and the life insurance company you purchased it from and no one can take that away from you . If you own a term life policy with no cash value , then Medicaid will not consider it an asset and it is irrelevant to your qualifying .
Medicare does not take life insurance from anyone . Medicare is a healthcare insurance program for those who have paid into it over the years -LRB- and some others -RRB- . Medicaid is an assistance program for those who have low income and low assets . If a person applying for Medicaid has term life insurance , it will not matter . If the Medicaid applicant has permanent life insurance with high cash value , there may be a need for the policy owner to take actions with the policy to enable them to be approved for Medicaid .
In the vast majority of situations the answer is no . Medicaid is a state-run insurance program designed to help low income persons pay for their health care . As a general rule you must not be able to afford to pay for private health insurance in order to qualify for Medicaid . However , this is a government program we 're talking about so there are always some exceptions buried in the fine print . This is where things can get complicated and the rules can vary from state to state in some situations . Some state Medicaid programs will assist in paying private insurance premiums for a person who can not fully pay them . A low income person who has recently lost their job and their health insurance through their former job may be eligible for assistance in paying their COBRA premiums in some states . You would have to check with your state 's Medicaid office to learn what the rules are in your particular state . Also , you have a limited amount of time to apply for such assistance after losing your job in states that provide this type of assistance so time is of the essence . Medicaid also has a special program for people diagnosed with AIDS that may qualify them for premium payment assistance . Once again , you will need to check with your state 's Medicaid office to determine what their policies and procedures are for qualifying for such assistance .
Medicaid share of cost is a special kind of Medicaid program used in only a few states . I am not aware of a Medicare share of cost . Medicaid share of cost is for those who have too much income or assets to qualify for Medicaid . They have a share of cost factor based on their income and medical bills . When your medical bills equals your share of cost during the month , Medicaid picks up the rest of your medical bills for the remainder of the month .
Medicaid qualified annuities , or `` Medicaid friendly annuities '' , are annuities that can sometimes be used by couples when one person in the couple enters a nursing home . One spouse is able to keep half their assets and the home he/she lives in , the other spouse must spend down the other half on nursing home care before becoming eligible for Medicaid . Rather than spend down those funds , the spouse entering the nursing home transfers the money to the other spouse , who puts it in an irrevocable , immediate annuity that is set to pay the at-home spouse an income up to the number of years left in his/her life expectancy . Consult a knowledgeable elder law attorney in your state to see if this is allowed in your state , and to know all the pro 's and con 's before endeavoring to take out a Medicaid qualified annuity .
Medicaid allows persons going through a Medicaid spend down to hold onto a certain number of assets -LRB- $ 2,000 for an individual , much higher for a couple . -RRB- $ 1,500 of life insurance cash value in one policy is allowed in addition to that $ 2,000 limit . Let 's assume you are a widowed female in a nursing facility and your private funds are dwindling , so you are getting ready to go on Medicaid to pay your living and health care expenses . You have a life insurance policy with $ 10,000 cash value . What will happen to it ? 1 -RRB- You are allowed a final expense policy , so you could possibly assign that over to a funeral home or put it in a irrevocable trust to be used for funeral expenses . This would most likely be a feasible choice if the face amount of the policy is $ 15,000 or under . 2 -RRB- If the face amount is much larger than the cash value , you might be allowed to take a loan against your policy to get the cash value under the allowed amount , then use the loan to pay for your nursing home costs . That way you can still preserve your policy , even though you will be paying interest on the loan . 3 -RRB- In this example , there is no spouse , but if there was , you could transfer the ownership of the policy to your spouse , as long as it was compliant with Medicaid rules . If you have a disabled child , the policy could be transferred to a trust for them . 4 -RRB- You could convert your life insurance policy to a Long Term Care Benefit Plan that will enable you to keep a portion of the death benefit while legally using the policy to pay for your long term care costs . 5 -RRB- You could liquidate the policy and spend the cash on purchasing an allowable funeral policy or on your medical care .
No , Medicaid will not take your life insurance . You can have as much Term life insurance as you want , and you can have a final expense policy that will fund your funeral and burial needs . You can also have Whole Life insurance , but if the cash value of your life insurance goes above a certain amount , you may need to adjust your policy when going on Medicaid . Talk to your Health and Human Services Dept to discuss their guidelines and your options if you have a Whole Life insurance policy .
Yes . You can transfer the ownership of your life insurance policy to someone else . One reason that people change ownership though is to try to keep it from counting as an asset when qualifying for Medicaid . In those cases , it only works if you transfer it 5-years or more before applying for Medicaid . You can transfer the ownership to a funeral home for a 1st day exemption from Medicaid but you do n't want to do that with a large policy because Medicaid will get any money that is not used for the funeral . You can also transfer the beneficiary from one person to another .
It can be depending on the situation . In most cases if the proceeds are left to a named beneficiary then there are no estate issues . But there are exceptions to this . For example ; If a person is receiving Medicaid assistance for Long Term Care the cash value of a life insurance policy or in some States , the face amount will create issues as far as qualifying for benefits . If there was an undisclosed life insurance policy owned by the Medicaid recipient then the life insurance proceeds can be attached as part of the estate during Medicaid Recovery . Another exception may include large estates . For the average person there is no problem however , unless you have to deal with the Medicaid issues . If you have a large estate or your health is deteriorating and some type of long term care is imminent then seek out an elder law attorney or care resource planner for advice .
Yes . Eligibility rules for Medicaid is going to vary by state . Medicaid can help pay for services and costs that Medicare does n't cover . When you have both programs , Medicare pays first and Medicaid will pay second.If you qualify for Medicaid in your state , you automatically qualify for extra help paying for your Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage .
Yes . Eligibility rules for Medicaid is going to vary by state . Medicaid can help pay for services and costs that Medicare does n't cover . When you have both programs , Medicare pays first and Medicaid will pay second . If you qualify for Medicaid in your state , you automatically qualify for extra help paying for your Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage .
No . If you have full Medicaid assistance you no longer need a Medigap Supplement policy . Everything that is not covered by Medicare will be covered by Medicaid . However you should make sure you are on full Medicaid . There are some people who get Medicaid assistance that pays their Medicare Part B Premium and RX assistance but does not pay their Medicare co-pays or deductibles .
You can , but this is actually pretty rare . It is illegal for any agent to sell you a Medigap policy if they know you are on Medicaid . This is asked on every Medigap insurance application , so if answered truthfully , you would generally not be able to purchase a Medigap policy . Some Medicare beneficiaries purchase a Medigap policy , and then at some future point become eligible for Medicaid . Since Medicaid essentially provides the benefits provided by the Medigap policy , the Medicare/Medicaid beneficiary may suspend their Medigap policy for as long as they are on Medicaid . They technically still have Medigap , but in a suspended status .
When you apply for Medicaid , a representative of the US Dept of Health and Human Services will meet with you to determine your eligibility . There is a limit on how much income you can have , and also a limit on the amount of assets you have , in order to qualify for Medicaid . Your assets do include any cash value life insurance policies that you own . If you have Term insurance , it will not be counted , because there is no cash value in Term life insurance . If your cash value in Whole or Universal Life exceeds a certain amount , you have some options . You may be able to designate it for your funeral expenses . Or you may be able to use the cash value for long term care expenses and keep at least part of the death benefit . Your social worker will help you with your Medicaid spend down , but you can also contact a reputable life insurance agent or attorney to assist you .
If you have Term life insurance , there is no cash value in it to count as an asset in a Medicaid spend down . If you have Whole or Universal life insurance with a large amount of cash value , it may or may not exceed cash value limits of policies that you can keep while entering a nursing home with Medicaid funds . Your social worker will tell you . If your policy does have high cash value , there is a law that allows you to retain some of the death benefit and use your cash to pay for your nursing home care . Or , you can transfer ownership of your policy to someone else , if it will be at least 5 years before you need to use long term care , and if you do not have the resources to pay for it in other ways . The nursing home will not take your life insurance policy . It will be evaluated along with all your assets , if Medicaid is needed .
When you go through a spend down process to apply for Medicaid , they will look at your assets . Term Life Insurance does not have a cash value , so is not considered an asset . Cash value life insurance is allowed to have a certain face amount , and if it is under that , you can keep it . If it is higher than the allowable limit , you may have more choices than just cashing it in and using it for your skilled care expenses -LRB- note : Medicaid does not just take your policy away -RRB- . You can possibly assign the policy to a funeral home for your final expenses . Or you may be able to keep part of the death benefit and use the rest to help pay for nursing home costs under the Long Term Care Benefit Plan . Your social worker should help you find the option that works best for your welfare . If you foresee going on Medicaid in the distant future , you may want to consider transferring ownership of your cash value life insurance to someone else . This must be done years ahead of time , or it will still be called an nonexempt asset .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance An Inheritance ?
Life insurance is an indemnification product to protect the beneficiaries of the insured against economic loss . If economic loss occurred because of taxes during the transfer of the estate from one generation to the next , then your inheritance would be reduced by taxation . Life insurance would pay that tax , so you would suffer a reduction in your inheritance . Life insurance can also create an estate , so to that degree life insurance would be an inheritance .
The first consideration in purchasing a life insurance policy is to determine what planning goal you are attempting to achieve : indemnification , income or inheritance . Indemnification can be temporary or permanent . If the economic liability is temporary then term life insurance which -LRB- depending upon your age -RRB- can be purchased up to 30 years . If the economic liability is permanent then guaranteed universal life can be purchased to age 121 . Income and inheritance planning goals require permanent life insurance policies . Income goals with life insurance are generally considered because of the tax advantages and crediting method options : For market risk investing , variable universal life insurance . For domestic and foreign indice investing , indexed universal life . For interest rate investing , current assumption universal life insurance or participating whole life insurance . For inheritance , guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- insurance for singles and GUL survivorship for couples .
Generally speaking , yes , inheritance from an Annuity is taxable . It can be subject to all normal federal and state taxes that are applicable to inheritance . This can vary depending on your federal tax situation and your state & local tax laws . If you have inherited or expect to inherit Annuity proceeds you should speak with a CPA or Tax Attorney .
Life insurance is an indemnification product to protect the beneficiaries of the insured against economic loss . If economic loss occurred because of taxes during the transfer of the estate from one generation to the next , then your inheritance would be reduced by taxation . Life insurance would pay that tax , so you would suffer a reduction in your inheritance . Life insurance can also create an estate , so to that degree life insurance would be an inheritance .
Life insurance proceeds rarely incur any form of income tax . The proceeds can be taxed for estate and inheritance tax purposes . Life insurance proceeds are included in the gross estate calculations for all deceased individuals . Any gross estates that have a total value exceeding $ 5.25 million can be subject to US Federal Estate Tax . Additionally , some states impose either an estate tax or inheritance tax -LRB- or in some rare cases both -RRB- . These taxes have their own specific rules about the total amount and what might be taxable . You should consult additional resources concerning state specific estate and/or inheritance taxes for more information about how life insurance proceeds might be taxed in your state .
Life Insurance is a mortality product constructed to cover temporary -LRB- term insurance -RRB- or permanent -LRB- permanent insurance -RRB- financial liabilities . Is your financial liability temporary or perpetual ? Term life insurance is generally offered in increments of 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . Permanent life polices can cover you to age 121 and has five policy types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . There are three major planning categories for life insurance : indemnification , income and inheritance . First , determine which planning category you need . If the planning category is indemnification and/or inheritance then determine is the need temporary or permanent ? The solution is either term or guaranteed universal life insurance . If the planning category is income , life insurance can be a supplemental retirement alternative . Here 's some product alternatives : current assumption universal life insurance with three crediting methods : interest rates , indices and separate sub account performance using the lowest TAMRA compliant death benefit option . For income , you may also want to look at TAMRA compliant lowest death benefit , participating whole life , with a max term rider and a paid up additions rider .
Life insurance addresses three major planning goals : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification is insuring the lives of family members or business associates for the economic benefit of their beneficiaries . To indemnify the economic liability of short term financial exposure , you may want to consider term life insurance with a conversion policy provision to permanent life insurance . If the financial liability is perpetual , a permanent life insurance policy is recommended . Guaranteed universal life is the most economical of permanent policies . Income from life insurance policies can generate tax advantaged distributions for supplemental retirement planning . There are four life insurance policies to consider based on your risk tolerance . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life use interest rate crediting methods . Indexed universal life can use domestic and foreign indices . Variable universal life use separate subaccounts allocated to equities and bonds . Inheritance planning with life insurance can address estate transfer taxation , charitable giving and creating an estate for children and grandchildren . Married couples should consider guaranteed survivorship where two lives are used in one policy which can result real savings instead of two separate policies .
It depends on the financial planning goal . Life insurance addresses three major planning goals : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification is insuring the lives of family members or business associates for the economic benefit of their beneficiaries . To indemnify the economic liability of short term financial exposure , you may want to consider term life insurance with a conversion policy provision to permanent life insurance . If the financial liability is perpetual , a permanent life insurance policy is recommended . Guaranteed universal life is the most economical of permanent policies . Income from life insurance policies can generate tax advantaged distributions for supplemental retirement planning . There are four life insurance policies to consider based on your risk tolerance . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life use interest rate crediting methods . Indexed universal life can use domestic and foreign indices . Variable universal life use separate subaccounts allocated to equities and bonds . Inheritance planning with life insurance can address estate transfer taxation , charitable giving and creating an estate for children and grandchildren . Married couples should consider guaranteed survivorship where two lives are used in one policy which can result real savings instead of two separate policies .
There are three basic planning goals for life insurance : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification At minimum , seniors have final expense liabilities that they generally dont desire to pass on to their children . Covering those expenses with a final expense life insurance product is a great alternative with a company that offers benevolent geriatric underwriting . Life insurance underwriting is extremely important as you become older , especially if you need more coverage than final expense . A good life insurance company that has sizable retention and death benefit break points can really help keep the price tag down . Retention is the risk the life insurance company is willing to take on without sharing the risk with other life insurance companies . The bigger the retention , the more wiggle room to negotiate the underwriting offer . And death benefit break points can reduce the cost of insurance as you buy more coverage . Break points generally start at $ 250,000 , then $ 500,000 , $ 1,000,000 and $ 3,000,000 . Guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice . Income Life insurance has the potential to generate tax advantaged income and , if properly designed , may generate tax free income as long as the policy is issued as a non-modified endowment contract and is kept in force for the life of the insured . Some seniors use life insurance tax free income in tandem with their Social Security benefits and defer their qualified plan distributions until age 70 . Its a good planning strategy . Life insurance policies with the least expense loads are the most desirable . Indexed universal life may be the best policy choice . Inheritance Many seniors desire to make a difference with their children , grandchildren and charities . A survivorship policy for married couples is the best solution because in leverages two lives on one contract and pays the death claim at the death of the second insured . Survivorship guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for married couples and guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for single seniors . We spreadsheet the life insurance companies based on underwriting , product provisions and price , assisting seniors in the decision making process .
Permanent life insurance can be used to fulfill financial strategies in indemnification , income or inheritance planning . Permanent indemnification and inheritance products are participating whole life and guaranteed universal life insurance , both issued for as a single life and second survivor . Permanent income products are participating whole life insurance and current universal life that credits an interest rate , index and separate sub account equities/bonds performance .
There is a diversity of life insurance products to fit multiple planning applications like indemnification , income and inheritance scenarios . Term and guaranteed universal insurance are generally indemnification and inheritance products to protect the policy beneficiaries from financial liabilities or benevolent giving of the policy insured . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life are conservative interest rate crediting policies for income scenarios . Other polices for income scenarios are Indexed universal life crediting earnings from indices , both domestic and foreign as well as variable universal life insurance which can credit from the guaranteed interest account or the separate sub accounts utilizing market equities and bond instruments . Product suitability , from a policy holder point of view , is determined by creating a financial profile that includes establishing product risk tolerance , economic goals and a reasonable timeline of life events based on life expectancy .
Life insurance death benefit proceeds pass to the beneficiaries generally tax free . Those proceeds can be considered an inheritance , along with any other assets that are passed down to the next generation . The leverage of life insurance can create an inheritance for children and grandchildren , even charitable organizations . That 's life insurance !
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
If states have inheritance taxes , yes , life insurance proceeds are subject to those . The death benefit of a life insurance policy is also subject to federal estate taxes . This year , 5.25 million dollars is exempt from federal estate taxes . Each state has their own guidelines as to what is exempt from state estate , or inheritance , taxes .
Life insurance is a mortality product . It is used in three major planning modules : indemnification , income and inheritance . If you have ongoing permanent financial liabilities or inheritance issues guaranteed universal life insurance is the best alternative to pay for coverage . For tax advantaged income current assumption universal life has three crediting method options for long term savers and investors : interest rate , indices and separate sub accounts that use market equities and bonds . If the policy is designed with the lowest TAMRA compliant death benefit option , the potential for income is increased .
Life insurance is a financial product for indemnification , income and inheritance planning . All financial purchases must first determine product suitability for the buyer . If your financial liability is temporary , then term life insurance is the main consideration . If your financial liability is permanent , then term life insurance is the main consideration . Indemnification and inheritance are death benefit solutions . An income scenario is cash accumulation solution . For tax advantaged income current assumption universal life has three crediting method options for long term savers and investors : interest rate , indices and separate sub accounts that use market equities and bonds . If the policy is designed with the lowest TAMRA compliant death benefit option , the potential for income is increased .
Yes possibly . Indiana has an inheritance tax that life insurance can be included in . Spouses are exempt , but most other kin and non-related persons to the insured could incur the inheritance tax . In Indiana the tax ranges from 1 to 20 % and is due 9 months after death .
Yes , annuities can be inherited . When the annuity is inherited during the annuitization stage , the recipients of the annuity payments will need to pay income tax on the payments according to the tax bracket they are in . The annuity must be the type of annuity that is paid out for a certain period and not the lifetime income annuity ; otherwise , the annuity payments would end when the annuitant 's life ended .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question is : Is having life insurance a good idea ? Well , just remember , do you have financial liabilities ? Do you have future obligations ? Do you have any intention for charitable gifting or any kind of inheritance that you want to leave your children or grandchildren ? If any of those questions are yes , then you need to look at life insurance . Now , it could be temporary life insurance , which is term life insurance , which is very , very inexpensive today . But if you have permanent obligations , permanent liabilities , or a charitable intent or a future inheritance where you want to bless your children and grandchildren , you 're going to need to look at permanent . Is it a good idea ? You want to indemnify both earners . Almost all marriages today , both mom and dad are working , so you want to make sure that you indemnify them both , because all their liabilities , whether it 's mortgage or long-term debt , those are all obligations that we carry together as working spouses . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover Emergency Room Visits ?
Yes . This actually falls under your Medicare Part B coverage . Medicare Part A is known as hospital insurance , but handles the inpatient hospital stays . Emergency Room visits are covered under Part B. Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover about 80 % of the costs for medical care . Generally , you 're paying your Part B deductible and 20 % of the Medicare-approved amount for the services the doctor -LRB- s -RRB- provide . A Medicare supplement plan can cover these expenses .
Medigap Plan N is one of ten standardized plans offers coverage in addition to the standard benefits provided by other Medicare Supplement plans . It is most simiiar to Medigap Plan D , with two major exceptions . With N , you are responsible for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do n't result in inpatient admission before your Part B coverage being paying expenses at 100 % . Basic benefits offered by Plan N include : Medicare Part A hospital coinsurance and other costs up to an additional 365 days after Original Medicare benefits are exhausted Medicare Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayments -LRB- except for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to a $ 50 copayment for emergency room visits that do not result in inpatient care -RRB- First three pints of blood used in a medical procedure Plan N also offers the following additional benefits : Skilled Nursing Facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign travel emergency care -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- When available , many consumers find they can save $ 50 per month or more when compared to the more popular Plan F . If your doctor accepts Medicare assignment as payment in full , and you do not see your physician more than twice per month , Plan N can be a great way to lower your overall health care expenses .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
Medicare Supplement Plan N is a standardized Medigap Plan . Every insurance company who sells Plan N offers the same exact benefits . The only difference is the price . Plan N covers the following : 100 % of the Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . 100 % of Medicare Part B coinsurance , except for a copayment of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 copay for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted -RRB- . 100 % First 3 pints of Blood 100 % Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 100 % Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 100 % of Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- Deductible 80 % to a lifetime max benefit of $ 50,000 for Foreign Travel emergency . Plan N does not cover : The annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Part B Excess Charges -LRB- Above the Medicare Approved Amount -RRB- If you have any other questions about Plan N or other Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 or visit www.remedigap.com .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Yes . Now , how it is covered can vary significantly from one insurance carrier to another and even within the various health insurance plan options a specific health insurance carrier offers . So , your coverage for an Urgent Care visit can range all the way from a simple copayment to being subject to your plan 's deductible and coinsurance requirements depending upon the plan you are enrolled in . Urgent Care is for those situations such as minor injuries or sudden onsets of mild illnesses that do n't justify the use of a hospital emergency room but require timely attention that ca n't be provided by your primary care physician -LRB- weekends , doctor is all booked up that day , etc. -RRB- . Services delivered in an Urgent Care setting are usually far less expensive than the same treatment received in an emergency room so most health plan designs are set up to encourage their members to use an Urgent Care/Minor Medical delivery site as opposed to going to the emergency room .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
For emergency room visits for medially approved conditions , when the patient is treated and released , ER costs are covered by Medicare Part B -LRB- medical insurance -RRB- . The patient is responsible to pay the co-payment of the emergency room charge plus the co-pay for each specific service received -LRB- such as X-Rays or EKG -RRB- .
Original Medicare Part A & B do not come with Co-Pays . You are , however , responsible for deductibles and co-insurance . Co-pays are mostly associated with Medicare Advantage Plans and Prescription Drug Plans . The co-pays do have a wide range from one Plan to the next , so it is always a good idea to review the Outline of Coverage for the Plan you have or may be considering . If you have a Medigap Plan -LRB- also known as Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- , there is one standardized plan that does have co-pays . With Plan N , the customer is responsible for co-pays for doctor visits . The co-pay will not be more than $ 20 for an office visit . Plan N also requires a $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit . This co-pay is waived if you are admitted into the hospital .
The best Medicare Supplement Plans in my opinion are Plans G and N. With Plan G you only have one small deductible to meet -LRB- $ 166 -RRB- and there are no copays for a doctor office visit . Rates are very competitive with Plan G among insurance today companies today . Plan N can save you money on your monthly premium if you are comfortable paying a small co-pay of $ 20 for some doctor office visits . There is a $ 50 co-pay for an Emergency Room visit that does not result in an inpatient hospital admission . Plan N has one of the lowest premiums of any of the Medicare Supplements that offer comprehensive coverage for the gaps in your Medicare Part A & B coverage .
PCP stands for primary care physician . This is typically a general practitioner you see for medical issues first , unless you go to a hospital 's emergency room for an emergency . Depending on the plan type you have , you may need to see your primary care physician first before you can see a specialist - the carrier would likely require a referral form to cover the visit to the specialist , otherwise you may be subject to paying the entire visit yourself out of pocket .
Does health insurance cover urgent care ? In most cases yes , but it will depend on the plan you have . Some plans cover urgent care very well to encourage it 's use over emergency room care . Urgent care was created to help reduce the excessive cost of people using emergency rooms for non emergency situations . More than likely your health plan provides favorable plan design for the use of urgent care .
Most health insurance plans give some coverage overseas . The extent of the coverage in most cases is determined by looking at the event as life threatening.If that is the case , then emergency room visits would be covered.What is important for the traveler to know is that most doctors and hospitals in foreign countries want payment up front for services at the time of the visit . One instance I know of that happened to a traveler in Panama was a traveler went to the hospital and was required to pay $ 5,000 up front as a deposit before they would treat them . The traveler has to file claims after the fact and wait for a reimbursement . If you are covered by Medicaid or Medicare , there is no coverage outside the U.S. except Medicare will cover emergencies in Canada if they happen while en route to Alaska . When traveling outside the U.S. and on cruises the best course of action is to purchase a medical policy specifically for coverage overseas . These policies are very economical and offer an array of terms and choices . One of the most important services is to have a multilingual customer service agent who can help you locate medical services , deal with currency exchanges , manage claims and can co-ordinate services 24/7 . There are many companies that provide these insurance policies . I represent International Medical Group -LRB- IMG -RRB- who has many choices for nationals and foreign nationals that travel globally for business or pleasure . They have been in business for over twenty years and concentrate solely on this market . The United States Consular Bureau of Affairs also has a list of companies that provide these policies .
Yes you can . Just be prepared to pay for the visit . Most Urgent Care facilities will want payment at time of the visit . Even if you have insurance they will require copay 's up front if you have any . Urgent care centers are designed to help take the lad off of emergency room visits .
Yes . This actually falls under your Medicare Part B coverage . Medicare Part A is known as hospital insurance , but handles the inpatient hospital stays . Emergency Room visits are covered under Part B. Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover about 80 % of the costs for medical care . Generally , you 're paying your Part B deductible and 20 % of the Medicare-approved amount for the services the doctor -LRB- s -RRB- provide . A Medicare supplement plan can cover these expenses .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B , but why would you want to ? Medicare Part B is for more than just doctor visits . Part B also covers outpatient diagnostic testing , labs , X-ray , CT scans , MRI , Emergency Room , ambulance and much more . Chemotherapy is also a covered Medicare Part B expense .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Does Car Insurance Group 5 Mean ?
Group 5 refers to a class of vehicle that is probably not going to caught engaging in drag racing because the engines are small . The cars listed are Citroen , Ford Ka or fiesta , Hyundai i20or hatchback , Peugeot 107 , Toyota Yaris , Volkswagen Lupo , and Polo . These cars should be a good alternative to buying a golf cart
In the land of Long-term Care Insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- , the word `` group '' roughly means `` guaranteed issue '' . Guaranteed issue means that all one has to do is apply and coverage will be issued - no formal underwriting . It takes a pretty big group for an insurance company to take on the risk of true group LTCi . I do n't believe any carriers provide it anymore , although much of it was sold previously and is still in force . Some carriers will still write `` simplified issue '' group wherein the applicant must answer 4 or 5 questions in the negative to qualify . If they answer `` yes '' to any of the questions , the insurance company may still consider them , but only if they authorize the insurance company to look at their medical records and maybe call them for an underwriting interview over the phone . Only a few carriers are still in this market segment of LTCi , however . Carriers will provide a small discount of 5 % or so to smaller numbers of applicants that are successfully underwritten and all work for the same employer . The minimum number depends on the carrier , but it is usually a minimum of 5 - 7 FTE . This is called `` multi-life '' long-term care insurance and is not true group . But , people refer to it that way.Multi-life underwriting may be `` simplified '' , or `` modified - simplified '' . Regardless , some underwriting does take place and a person may not qualify medically . In the past , if enough people in a multi-life situation qualified for coverage , a carrier would accept one person who did n't qualify medically and issue a base contract of coverage to that person . That accommodation is not actively marketed these days and may only be available under special conditions . With a multi-life policy , the insured owns his/her own policy and can take it with them when they leave employment . The discounted premium is portable , too.Multi-life may be worth looking into if the company only wants to insure executives , owners or key occupation classes . LTCi is not yet subject to ERISA rules , so companies can `` carve out '' who they want to provide this kind of insurance to . Payment of premiums by the corporation -LRB- especially C-corps -RRB- may qualify as a health insurance expense and deductible for tax purposes , as well . But , before assuming any special treatment of premium payments , one should consult with a qualified tax professional.Otherwise , there is no true group LTCi and fewer `` deals '' any more for LTCi .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
On Employer sponsored group plans the minimum cost is 50 % of the group rate of the employees , which is usually the median rate of the employees added together . But , the employer can elect to pay more than 50 % , just no less of the employees premiums . Ex . you have 5 employees that have an underwritten group rate of $ 200 per month per employee , or $ 2,400 per year x 5 employees = $ 12,000 x 50 % , which is $ 6,000 per year . But , this does not include coverage for dependents or the tax implications . That is just the bottom line dollar cost , before any adjustments , and does not take into account the type of insurance coverage selected . There are several ways to get employee coverage , this example of a group plan is just the most common .
Group life insurance is life insurance coverage for an employee that is paid for by their employer - the amount is generally for coverage up to the employees salary , or a multiple of their salary -LRB- e.g. 1.5 x or 2x salary -RRB- . Additional coverage is sometimes offered for an additional cost to be paid by the employee . The cost for additional coverage may be lower for a younger person -LRB- in their 20s , 30s , or 40s -RRB- , but group coverage most often has premiums banded in 5 year intervals . For example , a given rate is charged for someone between ages 35-39 , a higher rate for 40-44 , and so on . Please note , while there 's many great aspects to group coverage , there 's also big limitations to it as well : 1 -RRB- You do n't own the coverage 2 -RRB- Coverage is limited . If you want a larger amount of coverage , you will need to purchase an individual policy to provide the supplementing amount . 3 -RRB- If you leave the company , you lose your coverage - this is a HUGE item to keep in mind and a tremendous reason to buy an individual policy . You may have slightly higher premiums with an individual policy , but the pros are substantial - e.g. even if you quit or are fired from the company , you can keep coverage going . 4 -RRB- If you leave your company , some group coverage may allow you to convert your policy to a permanent program to keep it going . However , it is generally extremely expensive to do so and the premiums can be much higher than securing an individual policy . 5 -RRB- The cost of insurance as you get older on a group policy -LRB- e.g. age 55 , 60 , 65 , etc. -RRB- becomes very expensive compared to the cost of buying an individual one . You may want to ask for a list of rates for current employees at those ages as well as retired employees that keep their coverage .
Well , there really is n't an on the record answer for this . Older employees tend to cost more to provide health insurance for . Medical plans go one of two ways . One way is a level premium for all employees in the group . This is based on `` averaging '' the premium cost among the group . This is also done for gender . The other way is known as `` banded coverage '' where group premiums are grouped , usually in 5 year blocks and rates vary based on ages . You would hope an employer would n't use the medical premium cost as a hiring means test . It would possibly be considered age discrimination .
Some people use the term `` stop loss '' to mean `` maximum out-of-pocket exposures '' which is the point in a person 's health insurance policy when they 've met their deductible and any co-insurance cost sharing and the health insurance carrier becomes 100 % responsible for all health care costs after that point . Technically this is an incorrect use of the term . Stop loss traditionally refers to reinsurance arrangements within self-insured group health insurance plans . There are two types of stop loss insurance , specific and aggregate . Specific stop loss insurance protects the group plan from claims exposure above a certain point for any insured person in the group . For example , a $ 50,000 specific stop loss policy means the employer accepts the risk for the first $ 50,000 in claims on an individual and after that point the reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost . Aggregate stop loss insurance protects the employer from claims liability for the entire insured group above a certain point . A $ 1 million aggregate stop loss policy means the employer accepts the liability for the first $ 1 million in claims for their entire insured group , if the group 's claims exceed this limit then the aggregate reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
You should only be dealing with group underwriting if your group has more than 50 employees or you are considering a self-funded group health plan . The employees in your group will have to complete an application form and answer a variety of medical questions regarding various health conditions and prescription drug usage . These forms are then submitted for underwriting where an underwriter takes into consideration what health conditions exist in the group -LRB- diabetes , cancer , pregnancies , expensive maintenance drugs , etc. -RRB- and then makes a determination if the originally quoted rates for your group will generate enough premium to cover the average expected risk plus the now disclosed risks in your group . For example , if based on the census of your group the male to female ratio and average age in the group indicated a need for $ 20,000 per month in premium to cover the expected risk and overhead associated with your group you would start out with an proposal costing $ 240,000 annually . It is assumed there will be a certain average amount of health care consumption in your group based solely on the factors I 've described above . If , however , your group has risks in it that go beyond what is standardly assumed should exist -LRB- you have a large number of diabetics or some pregnancies in the pipleline or an ongoing cancer case for examples -RRB- then the underwriter will `` adjust '' the originally quoted rates to reflect the need for more premium to cover these higher than anticipated medical expenses . So , if the underwriter determines that your group is more likely to cost $ 300,000 in medical expenses and overhead rather than $ 220,000 as originally quoted , the underwriter will return a `` counter offer '' with a 36 % rate adjustment -LRB- $ 300K / $ 220K -RRB- to accept your group at its real risk level .
A 5 year Term Life Insurance policy has the rate locked in for 5 years . In my experience , the premiums for 5 year Term policies often exceed the premiums for 10 year Term , because there are far fewer companies that offer 5 year Term . If you purchase a 10 year Term policy and only want to keep it 5 years , you can simply cancel it after 5 years with no penalty .
If you are lucky enough to work for an employer who pays 100 % of the employee rate for the group health insurance they offer -LRB- pretty rare these days -RRB- then standard group contracts require all eligible employees to be enrolled . So , in that circumstance you might get health insurance coverage whether you want it or not . If you have to contribute towards the cost of the health insurance provided by your employer then you have the right to waive participating in your employer 's group health plan . I will presume , though , that your question is really about the `` Individual Mandate '' provision of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and its requirement starting on January 1 , 2014 that a person have health insurance coverage that meets the minimum essential benefit requirements under the law or be subject to the `` Shared Responsibility Payment '' -LRB- does n't that sound better than tax penalty ? -RRB- on your income taxes . ObamaCare does give you the choice of either getting health insurance coverage or going without coverage and potentially being subject to a tax penalty . In that sense you can opt out of having health insurance coverage . But wait there 's more ! The Affordable Care Act provides for persons in certain situations or who are members of certain groups to be exempt from the individual mandate requirement . Some examples are ; 1 -RRB- If the cost of coverage for you is more than 8 % of your annual household income 2 -RRB- If your annual income is below the threshold where you have to file personal income taxes 3 -RRB- If you qualify for a `` hardship '' exemption -LRB- this can be an escape route for many people -RRB- 4 -RRB- If you have had a gap in being covered of less than 3 months during the tax year 5 -RRB- Members of religious groups that object to coverage on religious grounds 6 -RRB- Members of non-profit religious organizations where members share costs 7 -RRB- Prison inmates 8 -RRB- Non U.S. citizens 9 -RRB- Native American tribe members 10 -RRB- Year long residents of U.S. territories such as Puerto Rico and Guam What could be more simple ? I hope this helps answer your question .
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
According to the National Association of Insurance Commisioners -LRB- NAIC -RRB- the following are the top 10 Health Insurance Companies : 1 . United Healthcare 2 . Wellpoint Inc. . Group -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association serving members in California , Colorado , Connecticut , Georgia , Indiana , Kentucky , Maine , Missouri , Nevada , New Hampshire , New York , Ohio , Virginia and Wisconsin -RRB- 3 . Kaiser Foundation 4 . Aetna Group 5 . Humana 6 . HCSC -LRB- Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas , New Mexico , Illinois , Oklahoma -RRB- 7 . Coventry Corp. . Group -LRB- although they were purchased by Aetna -RRB- 8 . Highmark Group -LRB- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Pennsylvania and other companies -RRB- 9 . Independence Group 10 . Blue Shield of California
The only reason to carry a 5 year level term is for a 5 year or less debt . Typically 5 year term is harder to find as many carriers start at 10 year term . I find in shopping that you can purchase 10 year term cheaper than buying a 5 year term just because of competition . If your need for life insurance is greater than 5 years seek the advice of an independent life insurance broker . Term life insurance policies rates increase as much as ten fold at the end of the term and force most back into the market . You will be 5 years older and perhaps not in as good of health .
If you have group coverage you may not need to pick up Medicare part B right away depending on the size of your group . Medicare coordinates with your health insurance . For smaller groups it will be primary , for larger groups it would be secondary . Primary means that Medicare pays first and your health insurance would act like a supplement . Secondary means that your insurance pays first and Medicare would just help pay any deductibles and copay 's . You do not need a Medicare supplement if you have group health insurance in most cases . If you have prescriptions covered at work do not pick up a Medicare Advantage plan or prescription drug plan without discussing it with your HR rep. You could get knocked off your group coverage and not be able to get it back .
What 3 questions does AARP ask for life insurance ? I guess the answer to this question would best be found on AARP 's website for life insurance . I think it might be more important to look at the insurance offered with those 3 questions . Currently it is a group policy offered through New York Life . NYL is a fine company so no worries there . This plan is a 5 year level term policy , which means every five years the cost will increase . The policy ends at age 80 , with nothing to convert over to . So if you need coverage beyond age 80 , you will be shopping again . Pricing wise , because of the few questions asked , the price tends to be high . This would be true of any insurance company that asks only a few questions . What you do n't ask about , you charge for . So a healthy person could do much better elsewhere , but for the person who wants to go this route and does n't mind the extra cost and the early ending , it 's fine .
What does it mean to become fully vested in a retirement plan ? What it pertains to is the percentage an employee gets from employer contributions to their retirement plan . Fully vested means that the employee now `` owns '' 100 % of his/hers employer contributions to their retirement plans . The most common vesting schedule is a 5 year schedule that begins with 20 % and finishes at 100 % . Once at 100 % with no breaks in service you stay at 100 % . If an employee were to separate service after a year , they would take 100 % of their contributions and only 20 % of any employer matching .
Assuming you mean price , the life insurance spreadsheets from the brokerage community are an excellent starting place to explore the life insurance company that best suits your financial profile , risk tolerance and economic goals . The spreadsheets are divided into two macro categories : Term Life Insurance and Permanent Life Insurance . Term Life Insurance is separated into guaranteed coverage periods 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years with health classifications for standard and better -LRB- 5 -RRB- as well as substandard ratings -LRB- 16 -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is divided into indemnification , income and inheritance planning goals -LRB- single life and survivorship policies -RRB- with health classifications for standard and better -LRB- 5 -RRB- as well as substandard ratings -LRB- 16 -RRB- . There is no one life insurance company that dominates any of these categories and subsets , but we monitor these areas diligently to keep consumers apprised of which life insurance companies rank the best
Most self funded employer plans are subject to ERISA rules and bypass most state regulations . Self funded plans have been popular for many years , mostly among `` jumbo '' groups . But several stop loss carriers will issue specific and aggregate coverage on groups as small as 25 employees . Due to Obamacare constraints , several carriers and TPA 's are creating plans that can cover smaller employer groups with 5 - 10 employees . When properly insured with spec and agg cover and solid financial underwriting , it is indeed possible to provide self funded coverage to smaller groups .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is A Renters Insurance Declaration Page ?
A Declaration Page , also referred to as a `` Dec Page , '' tells you the most pertinent parts of your policy . Along with containing the personal information -LRB- name , dob , address , etc. -RRB- , it also lists your policy number , effective date , summarizes the coverage amount and states the premium . Any changes -LRB- endorsements -RRB- or discounts will also be listed on this page . The dec page also provides information on the insurance company , including how to contact them , where to call for claims , etc. .
Located near the front of the policy , the declaration page lists the information that personalizes the coverage found in the following pages . It also lists all the forms that comprise the policy . This is sort of a table of contents . Your mortgage company will want a copy of this page of your policy . You should review it carefully as it contains a great deal of very important information When you look at the declaration page you can identify the name of the insurance company . Agents often represent multiple companies and this tells you exactly which company is insuring your home . Here you will find the policy number which represents the individual nature of the contract . The declaration page will describe the type of policy . There are several different forms of homeowners policies and this will tell you which form is being used . The declaration page will identify who is being insured . This is very important , particularly when there is a liability claim . The named insured should read like the deed to the property . The property should be clearly identified . There may be more than one insured and their relationship is often included in the declaration . This is where the mortgage company will be identified and the address of the company will be included , along with the loan number . Additional mortgagees can also be listed here with the same information . The name and address of the agent handling the policy also appears in the same general area . This is where you can go for service on the policy . The declarations make very important statements setting the coverage limits . While they are often identified by letters -LRB- A-M -RRB- there will be definitions in the subsequent pages . This shows the limit of each of the coverages in the policy . It usually shows the limit of liability . It usually shows the deductible applied to property claims , and states the annual premium for the policy . There is a lengthy list of forms that comprise the bulk of the policy . These attached pages detail exactly the nature and extent of the coverages , and the limits and exclusions that apply . As a homeowner you should look down this list and ask the agent to explain any coverage that you dont understand . This can trigger conversations about additional available coverages that might be appropriate for you and which you should have . This is a very important section and one that you dont want to overlook . After this is usually a general description of the property itself . It will identify the fire district , location of the nearest fire hydrant , proximity to a fire station and the protection class used to develop the premium . It will probably comment on the roof and indicate if there is any special rating applied . The company has relied on this information much of which youre provided and it should be correct . It is quite likely that your state has laws that require certain notifications to be on the declaration page , perhaps warning you that the policy does not cover flood , earthquake or building code upgrade coverage . Finally the declaration page will identify the company , its address , telephone number and state who is paying the premium and the address where communications are being sent .
All insurance polices have declarations pages . This is the page that declares your coverage 's . Usually this page on the front part of your policy -LRB- one of the first pages -RRB- and is one or maybe two pages long . The declarations page does not break down how the coverage 's work but simply state the coverage 's . It is important to note if you do not see a certain coverage on the declarations page you can bet you do not have this coverage .
The Declarations Page -LRB- also referred to as the ` dec page ' -RRB- on a Homeowners policy is the title page which details the Named Insured , the Term of Coverage , the Insured Mailing & Property Address and the Limits of Coverage for each Section . If there is a mortgage on the property , the mortgagee should be listed on the declarations page ; this is particularly important because the insurance carrier will mail the ` Mortgagee Copy ' of the declarations page to the address listed with the account number listed being the reference to the mortgage company . Each insured person should check to make sure that this information is correct in order to avert unnecessary communication with the mortgage company .
A declaration page would show coverage had been purchased , when it had been purchased and when it would expire . However I would not accept a declaration page as proof of Renters Insurance or any insurance for that matter . I would not accept it because there is no guarantee that the Insured or Renter will make the next payment for the policy . If he does n't , the policy would cancel and you wo n't know . If I want proof that coverage is in force , I would request a Certificate of Insurance and I would also request I be named as Certificate Holder . If I 'm named Certificate Holder , the insurance company may -LRB- depends on State Regulations -RRB- be obligated to tell you when coverage is threatened to be canceled . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
A Home Insurance declarations page also known as the ` dec page'is the cover page or summary to the limits of coverage afforded on your specific insurance policy . This page will include the Named Insured , Mailing Address , Property Address , Policy Number , Effective and Expiration Dates , Customer Service Contact Telephone Number , Claim Service Contact Telephone Number and Limits of Coverage . In addition , the declarations page usually includes the Policy Form Number which is the main policy form usually written by the ISO -LRB- Insurance Services Office -RRB- including all definitions , conditions and exclusions along with all the including endorsements that may be included with the policy . If there is a Mortgagee listed on the policy , the Mortgagee Clause will also be listed with the Name , Address & Loan Number of the mortgagee where a copy of the policy and all communication will also be directed . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The declarations page of any insurance policy regardless of whether it is home , auto , life or health , is the page that contains your basic policy information . It will usually be titled declarations page and will show your policy number , coverage 's , and company contact information . It is basically a summary of your policy .
The Declaration page of a Homeowners ' Policy is the page that outlines the coverage that is particular to your home . The Declaration -LRB- Dec -RRB- page includes the policy number and the date your policy began . It lists you as the policyholder and both your mailing and location address . It goes on to state the current property amounts including your Dwelling , Other Structures and Personal Property as well as any `` inside limits '' that may be stated for particular categories of personal property such as jewelry , fine arts , fire arms etc. . The policy Dec will state your policy deductible for property coverage and the settlement option -LRB- usually Replacement Guarantee -RRB- . Next it will state the amount of Liability coverage you have as well as any Medical Payment protection . The Dec will also show the property rating territory , proximity to a fire hydrant and fire protection class . Finally , the premium will be listed .
The life insurance policy at purchase should meet your personal unique needs . Isthe face amountadequate to cover my loved ones financial needs such as debt , income replacement or for a business the key person 's value to the company ? If cash value plans does it meet the retirement goals you were aiming for ? Once the policy is purchased the components of the policy to look for are , first the declaration page . This is one of the first pages of the policy and is a summary of coverage . the death benefit , premiums paid , terms and dates concerning your coverage . Next look for the illustration pages . These pages explain any cash value building in your policy or if term the guarantee lengths of premiums and any future rate increases . Lastly find the terms and conditions page . This page explains any exemptions , waivers or riders on your policy . Your loved ones should not be surprised at an untimely death that a benefit is eliminated or reduced . Always seek advice of a professional broker to avoid any unexpected issues .
A homeowners policy is a package of forms that identify the coverage the company is extending on the property . They are not specific to your property . The declaration page identifies all of the parties in the policy and states the absolute limits of the policy . This is the part of the legal contract that customizes the forms into an understandable whole . The declaration page is what makes the policy yours .
An suto insurance declaration page is one oart of what is considered the complete insurance contract . The declaration page specifically states the name of the insuring company , policy number and the effective and expiration date of the policy . It also lists the named insured -LRB- s -RRB- , identifies the vehicle or vehicles that are insured by the policy and the specific coverage provided to each car . Finally , it includes the term premium that is charged for the coverage provided . The complete insurance contract also includes the `` Policy Jacket '' and any amendments . Be sure to read through the complete contract and discuss it with your insurance professional to be sure you understand all the terms and conditions .
You can find out who your homeowner 's insurance is with by looking at the declarations page which will list your coverage , mortgage company and the insurer . If you ca n't find the declaration 's page , contact your mortgage company since they will likely have a record of it . If that fails , start calling different insurers !
A Declaration Page , also referred to as a `` Dec Page , '' tells you the most pertinent parts of your policy . Along with containing the personal information -LRB- name , dob , address , etc. -RRB- , it also lists your policy number , effective date , summarizes the coverage amount and states the premium . Any changes -LRB- endorsements -RRB- or discounts will also be listed on this page . The dec page also provides information on the insurance company , including how to contact them , where to call for claims , etc. .
The start date of a homeowners policy is clearly displayed on the declaration page . The actual declaration page might not reach you for a few days ; however , most agents have binding authority and can issue a certificate of insurance which includes this start date for coverage . This is particularly important when there is a real estate closing .
There are two types of life insurance fundamentally , term life insurance and permanent life insurance . Term insurance has no cash value with an exception of a return of premium rider at the end of the term . Permanent life insurance comes with different names . the most popular are whole life , universal life , indexed universal life and variable life . These all have a cash value component . Open your policy to the declaration page . This page will tell you the type of policy you have . If you find it is a permanent plan mentioned above , then turn over to the illustrations page . These pages will give you the cash value of at each policy year with the cash value of your plan .
A `` Declarations Page '' in any insurance policy is simply the page in the policy that states what the insurance company is insuring and what benefits will payable if the insured incurs a loss and also covers details like `` what if the insured causes the loss due to negligence ' and a life insurance policy in most cases will state in the case of `` suicide '' the policy will not pay
The Declaration Page of your policy outlines your specific coverage for the policy as issued by your insurance company . The `` Dec Page '' will show the effective date that the policy period began as well as it 's expiration date which is usually 1 year later . It will list your mortgage company and will also include your name and mailing address as well as the property address if different . It will then list the specific coverage for you dwelling , personal property , additional structures and Liability as well as the property deductible . If there are any it will list any inside limits to certain categories of personal property like jewelry , camera equipment etc. . Finally it will list the distance you are to a fire hydrant and/or fire station and the Fire rating classification as well as your annual premium . Your complete policy consists of the declaration , the Policy Jacket which outlines the broad language coverage that the policy provides as well as it limitations and exclusions , and any applicable endorsements .
An Auto policy on the st page should have what is called your declarations page . This will have on it Bodily injury liability limits example would $ 25,000 per person / $ 50,000 -LRB- this is medical bills they pay to others -RRB- Then it should have Property damage example $ 10,000 -LRB- this is the coverage to the cars or fence or tree or what ever you cause damage to other then medical bills -RRB- Then there is a section that you should have that is Uninsured and underinsured This should be matching limits to your liability limits listed above . This if for you if you get hit by someone that has no insurance or has insurance but there limits are not high enough to pay all your medical bills that you got from the accident then there is medical pay usually this is 5,000 this is for you also incase you are hurt on near or around your vehicle it also is used for funeral bills incase you die in your car you loved ones can use this to help with the funeral expense then If you have what some call `` Full '' coverage this would be the deductible part . Comprehensive or other then collision coverage less your deductible then there is collision . In Montana we do not have what some state have which is call PIP which is personal injury protection .
In New York there are few variations in the renters policy . The basic policy covers Personal Property , Additional Living Expense , Medical Payments , and Personal Liability . Many insurance carriers use their own policy forms and endorsements . A reputable agent or broker will have a specimen policy available and can outline the various coverages . Your Personal Property can be covered for Actual Cash Value or Replacement Cost . A good insurance representative can explain the difference in terms you can understand . The standard renters policy provides ` named perils ' on your personal property . ` Open perils ' commonly known as ` all risk ' is also available for more premium . Deductibles for the property coverage start at $ 100 or $ 250 and go up from there . The higher the deductible , the more the savings in premium . Many landlords require their tenants carry renters insurance and provide evidence of it - so if this is your situation , find out what the requirements are . Most insurance carriers in NY will not add the landlord as an ` additional insured ' under the personalliability section . Sometimes landlords request this in the rental agreement . Usually , a copy of the declarations page will satisfy the landlord .
Renters polices typically say $ 0 under coverage A on your declarations page in your policy . Therefore , no coverage would exisit . Renters polices contain coverage for your contents , your belongings and usually liability protection in the event you are sued .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Life Insurance Companies Have Failed ?
Insurance companies are regulated by individual states . States provide guarantee associations which keep coverage in force as long as premiums are paid or there is cash value . This is often accomplished by transferring policies to another insurance company . The policy terms could allow that the policy be terminated . If this is happening to you right now , continue making premium payments to keep coverage in force .
I could not personally answer every life insurance company that has failed recently . However , I can tell you that roughly 80 life insurance companies have failed in the last 40 years , so not all that often . When a life insurance company fails it goes into receivership versus bankruptcy . This process is handled by the courts that take the companies remaining assets to pay claims on a percentage basis to policy holders . Next to be paid would be creditors of the business on a percentage basis . Last to be paid would be the agency and agents themselves . Usually at this point the funds have all been dispersed and if the agents were advanced commissions , they too would repay the company by court order .
I assume that you mean failed as in `` did not pay what it guaranteed '' . Annuities are backed by the claims paying ability of the Insurance company that issued the policy . This is why it is very important to consider the financial rating of the company you use . Since 2008 , there have only been 3 `` B '' rated insurance companies that have failed . There have been more C , D , & E rated companies that have failed , but not many . And most of the ones that did were D rated or worse . Since 2008 there have been no B + or better companies that have failed . -LRB- Actually its longer than that , but the records I currently have access to only go back that far . But I am not personally aware of any insurance companies that were A rated at time of failure -RRB- This is why most agents recommend using a B + , or better yet , an A rated company . It is also important to point out that just because an insurance company fails , does not mean the annuity fails to pay . Insurance companies are highly regulated . And the states all have a safety net type system set up to help secure the guarantees made by failing insurance companies . Visit WEBSITELINK for more info on what happens in the event of an insolvency . But it is important to remember that whatever safety net might exist . It is no substitute for a solid financial rating . There are way too many well rated companies to use a poorly rated one .
I could not personally answer every life insurance company that has failed recently . However , I can tell you that roughly 80 life insurance companies have failed in the last 40 years , so not all that often . When a life insurance company fails it goes into receivership versus bankruptcy . This process is handled by the courts that take the companies remaining assets to pay claims on a percentage basis to policy holders . Next to be paid would be creditors of the business on a percentage basis . Last to be paid would be the agency and agents themselves . Usually at this point the funds have all been dispersed and if the agents were advanced commissions , they too would repay the company by court order .
In Canada , Assuris is the not for profit organization that protects policyholders should their insurance company fail . All insurance companies in Canada are required to be members . Here is a overview of the coverage : For accumulation annuities , if your insurance company fails , your accumulation annuity policy -LRB- GIA for example -RRB- will be transferred to a solvent company . Assuris guarantees that you will retain 100 % of the accumulated value up to $ 100,000 . For payout annuities , if your insurance company fails , your payout annuity policy will be transferred to a solvent company . Assuris guaranteed that you will retain $ 2,000 per month or 85 % of the promised monthly income , whichever is higher . Full details of coverage can be found at www.assuris.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
When life insurance companies fail , they are almost always bought by other life insurance companies . The new life insurance companies usually treat those policies as they do their own business , honoring all the guarantees and dictates that were in place when the policies were taken out . If the failed company could not be purchased by or merged with another solvent company , there are state pools that will pay out a certain amount of the death benefit in lieu of insurance companies being unable to do so .
It really depends upon what you mean by `` failed septic system . '' If you mean you have septic backup into your home you could be covered if you have sewer/water backup . This is a endorsement in your policy that adds a sub-limit for clean-up AND repair . If you mean your septic tank has failed , that could be covered or could not be covered by a homeowners policy . It really depends upon the wording of your policy because there is no such thing as standardized septic tank coverage . Furthermore , if the septic tank has failed due to age or wear then that will definitely not be covered because that is more of a warranty issue than an insurance issue . I hope this helps .
If you fail to plan you plan to fail . That is the old saw . Some will have a retirement plan through their employer . Others will count on an inheritance or winning the lottery to fund their golden years . Sadly , many will never retire and will work as long as their health permits because they failed to plan .
So many insurance agents fail because this is a very hard business to be in . While from afar it looks easy , everybody looks wealthy and successful and people are just pounding upon the door demanding insurance . The reality is most people unwisely would forego carrying any insurance at all on themselves as it involves looking ahead and dealing with death . The purchase becomes `` another day , another time '' purchase . While it seems everybody needs coverage , very few pursue it , so it falls upon the insurance agent to make the case to the individual as to why they need coverage . The hard part about insurance is you ca n't taste it , drive it or feel it , at the end of the day , it is simply a promise to pay . It is a very hard thing to sell in reality . Agents fail because it is a difficult business and too many treat it like a sprint , rather than a marathon . A great amount of energy is expended quickly , along with resources with results that take a while . Most payments to agents take about 90 days after the application is taken . It 's a business that requires patience and a budget , the reason most agents fail is they lack either .
Yes they can . Just like any company . However due to regulatory intervention , it 's extremely rare . Life insurers are checked often by state regulators for financial well being and must maintain certain capital positions based on their outstanding liabilities . They are required to maintain at a very minimum twice the amount of capital on hand needed to cover the expected claims they will incur in any given year . If they fall near or below this number , then regulatory action begins to try and place the insurer in a better financial position . Additionally , if a company should fail , other companies typically purchase their assets and back the promises made by the failing insurer .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
Yes an insurance company can non-renew your homeowners insurance policy for several reasons . Main reasons are change in risk . This could be due to claims or hazards on your home that have increased and as a homeowner you fail to mitigate . In other words if the insurance carrier can no longer tolerate you as a risk the insurance carrier can chose non renew . Keep in mind all polices are self terminating at the end of a term and the insurance company can chose at that time to either offer a renewal or chose to not renew . This is not an actual cancellation . Cancellations are actually much more difficult . The only way a cancellation occurs is if you the insured fail to make a payment or often on a newly written policy a hazard was not dealt with or there was mis-representation on the application . These types of cancellations however fall on the insured and not the insurance provider .
When you are applying for life insurance and they ask you if you have had any illness or been hospitalized and you fail to disclose that information you have failed to disclose a material fact and that means the insurance company has a basis of refusing the future claim and cancelling your policy . If you are going to apply for life insurance yuo need to take a good dose of truth serum and tell the whole truth and nothing but truth or create problems for yourself
I would encourage you not to assume that you can not afford health insurance coverage . You can still obtain quotes from companies that have historically provided individual policies and they will continue to do so and you may find a better fit for your needs by calling Humana or Golden Rule -LRB- UHC -RRB- or your local insurance agent can assist you . If you fail to have coverage the rules after 03/31/2014 is you must pay the fine . One of the objectives of the ACA is stop individuals that do not have coverage failing to pay into the health care system .
Annuities fall under the category of life insurance , and each state regulates its own life insurance companies . States also each have a Life and Health Guaranty Association which can help back up contracts if life insurance companies fail . Fortunately , life insurance companies almost always sell to another company if they get into financial trouble , and contract guarantees are backed up by the new company . Historically , insurance companies have fared much better than banks . If a worst case scenario would occur and customers are left hanging in a company insolvency , these Life and Health Guaranty Associations would cover according to their state guidelines . This is generally the guaranteed portion of an annuity , up to a certain dollar amount . You can use this website to read more about the protections offered by your state : WEBSITELINK
Credit scores are often used by auto insurance carriers to determine premium rates . These scores have proven to be predictive of future accident claims . Auto insurance companies use credit reports in underwriting , but they do not report premium payment information to the bureaus . So there is no direct impact on your credit rating if you fail to make premium payments . However there may be a variety of indirect impacts on your score . If you are pulled over and fail to show evidence of insurance you may have to pay a fine . If you have an accident while uninsured , you may face large expenses for repairs , liabilities , medical expenses , and more . These added expenses could easily force you to become delinquent on debts that are reported to credit bureaus .
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
After we deal with the reason for the suspension not being citations and accidents , then we can look at the other possible complications . Today , computerized records and coding make the suspension a matter of record . Why were you suspended ? In many jurisdictions you can have your driving record suspended for failing to pay child support , or failing to pay a parking violation . The shortest answer is that the presence of a `` suspension '' on your MVR is an issue that can impact your insurability in the eyes of the employer and their insurance carrier . If the suspension can be clearly tied to a non-driving activity , you may be able to prevail with the employer and their insurance carrier and have the presence of the `` suspension '' overlooked . If your suspension is even remotely tied to driving activities , then this reflects on behavior and accountability and will have an impact on your employer and you as a driver on the company insurance coverage . Those impacts can range from a significant surcharge to being ineligible for coverage . The choice does n't belong to the company either . The carrier will need to be convinced your `` suspension '' is n't as relevant as it may otherwise appear . That is an uphill climb in most instances .
Plumbing that fails is not covered under your homeowners insurance policy , only the damage caused by your failed plumbing if the dwelling is damaged . For example a pipe under the sink breaks . The pipe itself is not covered but the water damage is covered . Of course if the house burns down the plumbing is covered .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Benefits From Whole Life Insurance ?
There are multiple parties that benefit from whole life insurance . It benefits the insured because whole life insurance builds cash value and earns a guaranteed interest rate . It also helps the insured sleep well at night knowing that in the event of premature death , his beneficiary will receive a death benefit . The insured can also take a tax-free policy loan out of the cash value since whole life is one type of cash value accumulating life insurance . The most direct benefit of whole life insurance is the death benefit payable to the beneficiary tax-free upon death of the insured .
In addition to the wonderful answers given by Carl , I would add that people who are looking for permanent coverage also benefit from whole life insurance . Whole Life stays in effect for your `` whole life '' , whereas Term Life only stays in effect for a `` term '' of a your life . So anyone who wants to use their life insurance for funeral expenses , passing their inheritance to their children , giving to a charity , or other purposes that will not go away after a `` term '' of time , can benefit from Whole Life insurance .
We who purchase whole life insurance consider our beneficiaries as the ones who ultimately benefit . However , there is a vast pool of people who benefit . They are the other people the company insures because you shared youre their risk . Of course the company and its employees benefit for administering the policy . Ultimately the economy of the country benefits as mortgages are let , loans are made and people have money in retirement .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Graded Benefit Whole Life Insurance is whole life insurance that pays a reduced benefit during the first one to three years , then pays the full death benefit after that . E.g. . If death occurred during year one or two , it may pay back all you paid in , plus 10 % . If death occurred during year three or afterwards , it would pay the beneficiary the whole death benefit . Different policies are graded a different number of years , and each carrier has their own criteria for how much is paid back during the graded years . Most graded benefit whole life policies are only graded for natural death . I.e. death due to illness or old age . They usually pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for accidental death . Guaranteed issue whole life policies are graded , and some simplified issue policies are graded . Simplified issue policies are those that do not require an exam . The biggest thing to watch out for with graded whole life insurance is whether the premium stays level for life . Some graded whole life policies have premiums that go up at regular intervals . With some , the company may raise the premiums at any time , as long as they do so for everyone owning that type of policy . If you anticipate living longer than a few years , it is best to buy a graded benefit whole life policy where the premium will stay level for the rest of your life . Please feel free to contact me at any time if you would like to see whether you qualify for an immediate benefit policy , or to get some competitive quotes for several graded benefit policies that have the price locked in for life .
In addition to the wonderful answers given by Carl , I would add that people who are looking for permanent coverage also benefit from whole life insurance . Whole Life stays in effect for your `` whole life '' , whereas Term Life only stays in effect for a `` term '' of a your life . So anyone who wants to use their life insurance for funeral expenses , passing their inheritance to their children , giving to a charity , or other purposes that will not go away after a `` term '' of time , can benefit from Whole Life insurance .
A whole life insurance policy is an extremely flexible product that can meet many needs in retirement . The most obvious need is death . It is obvious that retirement always ends in death . Death is not inexpensive . The proceeds of a whole life insurance policy can pay off some or all of those expenses . After a certain age term policies can not be written at any price . I recently had a client who forgot that there was a life policy on her husband . She was paying his funeral expenses on an installment plan . I discovered the policy and brought it to her attention . She was delighted . Another use of a whole life policy is to transfer property to heirs . Often a person will want to leave money to children , grandchildren or a favorite charity . They will then try to conserve their retirement assets so that money will be available when the die . Unfortunately they often rob themselves of lifes simple pleasures in their drive to provide that inheritance . A life insurance policy can do that at the beginning of retirement leaving the person the balance of assets to spend as they wish . Some people have estates that are subject to estate tax . The problem with estate tax is that if there isnt cash to pay the taxes , assets are often sold at below market value to pay the tax . Having cash can make the difference of keeping the family business going , maintaining the family farm or closing them up for taxes . Since that can happen at any time , a whole life policy is particularly flexible in that regard . Whole life insurance is often used when a person wants to leave a specific valuable asset to one child but wants to treat all the children in the same manner . The heirs that are not going to get that valuable asset could receive equivalent proceeds from a whole life policy and everyone would be happy . A whole life policy is often used to purchase the interest of another party in a business . In this case the surviving partners dont particularly want to share everything with a widow who may not be acquainted with the business . A whole life policy can provide the cash to take care of that situation by giving the survivors the funds they need to purchase the widows interests . Sometimes whole life insurance is used to fund day to day living expenses in retirement . I just finished a comparison that showed that a whole life policy performed as well as a fixed annuity in accumulating money for retirement and that it did that with the promise to pay the full benefit should the person die before retiring . The whole life policy has non-forfeiture provisions which can pay a lifetime stream of income if desired or the policy would also give the person the flexibility to use the policy in other ways depending upon future , unforeseen events . This may sound strange but I often get requests for whole life insurance from older individuals . They seem to appreciate the value of lasting protection at a fixed price .
Universal life insurance is a type of permanent life insurance program that features a flexible premium structure.It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making itmuch less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value . It 's ideal foranyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value -LRB- the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy -RRB- . You can guarantee benefits for up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most agents who sell Term Life Insurance also sell Whole Life . The exception may be some of the `` term shops '' on the internet . Final expense policies are usually Whole Life , so agents specializing in Senior life insurance would carry Whole Life . These usually have under $ 100,000 face amounts . `` Captive '' agencies -LRB- where they sell products for one company -RRB- usually have good Whole Life products for persons looking for larger face amounts . So do agencies that sell multiple products , but you need to consult with a licensed agent who understands Whole Life . A good way to start would be to call and ask for an agent who can compare a couple of Whole Life policies for you in detail . If they are unable to do that , move on to the next one .
Whole life insurance is for a very special kind of person . First of all , you are someone who sees the need for life insurance protection on a lifelong basis . Not just to cover the mortgage , not just to protect your family , not just as a supplement for your retirement . You face the fact that as life goes on , your need for life insurance changes , but for many people , the need is always there . And it could be for you . You know that if you bought term insurance , odds are you 'd end up buying another policy anyway , after that one renews . At a higher price . And hopefully youre insurable . Might as well lock in to guaranteed rates on a permanent basis . This brings up the second point . You are a guarantee-oriented type of person . You realize that life insurance is the foundation of your financial portfolio . As such , it has to be strong . Reliable . You do n't want too many variables in this product because , if you have a shaky foundation , your whole portfolio could crumble . Therefore , you want a guarantee on the premium , and you want a guarantee on the death benefit . You are also someone who appreciates the added benefit of cash value inside whole life insurance . For many people , whole life insurance is the guaranteed portion of their asset portfolio . No other product gives better guarantees -LRB- go ahead and check out the interest rates on guaranteed products out there . Then compare them to the guarantees whole life gives you . -RRB- On top of that , with a top-flight company , the dividends - the non-guaranteed portion of the cash build up - can be pretty rich . With a little strategic thinking , those dividends can enhance the value of that product . They can be used to offset the cost . They can be used to enhance the survivor benefit . They can be used to put cash in your pocket . They can be used to offset the cost of another policy . Lastly , whole life insurance is for disciplined people . In order to receive all the benefits named above , you need to stick to the payment schedule . It 's a fixed-premium product and will not tolerate underfunding , or over funding , or skipping payments . If you realize the bang for the buck you can get with whole life insurance , and have the discipline to stick to a premium payment schedule , then you 'll be glad you bought this policy .
Whole Life covers you for your `` whole life '' . Term Life covers you for a term , or set number of years . Whole Life has cash value that can be utilized while you are still alive . Term Life does not -LRB- except for Term with living benefits , which allows you to use part of the death benefit if certain triggers are met -RRB- . Whole Life allows you to pay the entire premium at once , or in a limited number of years , after which no more premiums are owed . Term Life requires that you make periodic payments over the entire duration of the policy . If you drop a Whole Life policy after some length of time , you will usually have a reduced paid up policy that you can keep without making further premium payments . If you drop a Term policy , your coverage ends and you do not have any return of cash -LRB- unless you buy ROP , or return of premium Term Life -RRB- . With participating Whole Life , you may get dividend checks over the years . With Term Life , the only benefit you get will be if you die before the term ends . Whole Life costs more because it is a permanent product and has cash value in addition to death protection . Term Life costs less because it is temporary and offers pure death protection .
Whole life policies are well suited for needs that do not diminish over time . Some commonly found uses for whole life are : Family protection : To provide funds to support a surviving spouse and/or minor children , particularly for individuals who start a family later in life ; to pay final bills , such as medical or other estate expenses and federal and state death taxes . Business planning : Whole life insurance is often used for many different business purposes , such as insuring key employees , in split-dollar insurance arrangements , and funding non-qualified deferred compensation plans . Business continuation planning often involves using whole life insurance as a source of funds for buy-sell agreements . Accumulation needs : Some individuals will use the cash value feature of whole life as a way of accumulating funds for specific purposes , such as funding college education , or as a supplemental source of retirement income . Charitable gifts : To provide funds for a gift to charity . Whole life insurance , sometimes called permanent insurance , or ordinary life , is designed to stay in force throughout ones lifetime . As long as the policy owner meets his or her obligations under the policy , the policy remains in force , regardless of any changes in health that may occur . Unlike term insurance , where premium payments generally increase , as the insured gets older -LRB- the chance of death increases with age -RRB- , premiums for most whole life policies remain level . A portion of each premium payment is set aside to earn interest . Over time , a whole life policy will develop cash values . The accumulated cash values form a reserve which enable the insurer to pay a policys full death benefit , while keeping premiums level . During life , many whole life policies have provisions to borrow a portion of the accumulated cash value . If a policy is terminated without the insured dying , there are various surrender options for the cash value available to a policy owner . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
There are multiple parties that benefit from whole life insurance . It benefits the insured because whole life insurance builds cash value and earns a guaranteed interest rate . It also helps the insured sleep well at night knowing that in the event of premature death , his beneficiary will receive a death benefit . The insured can also take a tax-free policy loan out of the cash value since whole life is one type of cash value accumulating life insurance . The most direct benefit of whole life insurance is the death benefit payable to the beneficiary tax-free upon death of the insured .
Whole life insurance has many advantages to it . The first being that your premiums are fixed and guaranteed for the rest of your life and as a permanent insurance program , it builds cash value over time . If it 's a participating whole life policy , any dividends that are paid out can be used to either increase the death benefit via paid up additions , reduce your premium , or make a payment to you directly -LRB- options depend on which carriers whole life policy you have -RRB- . If you use the dividends to reduce the premium , the policy can become self-sustaining after a number of years - meaning no more premium payments . Non-participating policies only build cash value - these types of plans do not pay out dividends . If you 're buying whole life coverage when you 're young and its cash value builds for years and years , it can create a nice nest egg for funds that can be used during your retirement years . It 's important to remember that if you borrow from an insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the monies are expected to be paid back . If you cash out the policy , you lose the life insurance coverage . An alternative for those who are not very concerned about the cash value and want to maximize the death benefit of your life insurance , you may want to consider a guaranteed universal life policy instead of whole life . GULs can offer a larger amount of coverage than whole life policies for the same premium or save you a ton of money on your premiums for a given level of coverage . Make sure to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can create a structure that will best serve your needs , goals , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . These policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate The question of who should buy whole life insurance depends on the need for the coverage . When you 're young and you have 40 years to grow the cash value/face amount , it can be a helpful vehicle for growing funds while providing great life insurance protection -LRB- especially participating WL policies -RRB- . If you are buying purely for the death benefit , I recommend you look at purchasing a Guaranteed Universal Life policy -LRB- these policies maximize the death benefit and minimize the premium as they do n't focus on the build-up of cash value -RRB- . If you only need the coverage for a set amount of time -LRB- e.g. 20 years -RRB- , then you may want to look into term life insurance . While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to find out which benefit structure will be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for assistance . Thanks very much .
Graded death benefit whole life insurance is permanent coverage that features an alternative structure in the first 2 or 3 years of the policy -LRB- depending on the insurance company -RRB- . The program will feature one of two graded benefit methods . 1 -RRB- Return of premium - if death occurs during the graded period , any premiums paid into the policy is given to the beneficiary . If death occurs under accidental means , then the full benefit is still payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs due to illness or injury . Some carriers may offer interest on your premiums if the insured passes away during the graded period - be sure to review your policy to see if it 's under your policy . The return of premium structure is more commonly seen under graded benefit whole life policies . 2 -RRB- Reduced death benefit - if death occurs during the graded period , the coverage will payout a specific percentage of the death benefit , depending on which year during the graded period death occurs . For example , if death occurs during the first year of the policy , the carrier only pays 30 % or 35 % of the death benefit -LRB- depending on the carrier -RRB- - 70 % or 75 % if death occurs during year 2 . If death occurs under accidental means during the graded period , then the full benefit is payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under final expense policies -LRB- another name for small whole life policies with face amounts of $ 25,000 or less -RRB- , the responses to the health questions determine whether you will qualify for a level benefit -LRB- immediate full coverage -RRB- or a graded benefit . Typically , to qualify for a level benefit , all the health questions have to be answered no . Please note , just because you may not be able to answer all health questions no for one carrier 's program , does n't mean you would n't be able to answer no to all questions for a different carrier . Each insurance company has their own questions that they ask so one carrier may be able to consider a level benefit where another may not . The wording to the questions is critical to pay attention to . If you ca n't qualify for traditional final expense coverage , you always have the option for GUARANTEED ISSUE whole life . These programs do not ask any health questions whatsoever . They will feature the return of premium graded period . When buying any whole life insurance policy , be sure to remember 2 things : 1 -RRB- Do the premiums remain the same for the entire life of the policy ? - Some policies feature banded premium - meaning they go up every 5 years . They may be cheaper up front during the first couple years , but can cost significantly more over the long run . 2 -RRB- What age does the coverage carry you to ? - Some policies will only carry you to age 80 or to age 90 - and if you live beyond that age , your policy automatically terminates . It 's best to set yourself up with something that guarantees the coverage will remain in place for life -LRB- as long as you continue to pay your premiums of course -RRB- . I always suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare multiple insurance policies with your medical history to make sure you 're getting the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost . There is no cost to doing so . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Wow . Where should I start ? Well let 's first look at the two major choices . Term or Whole Life . With term , you are basically renting insurance . You have a death benefit during the term of your policy , so long as you pay . You are gambling whether you will die during that period . If you are lucky to live longer , they you get nothing . Not the best of deals that way , but it does give initially cheap protection for a growing family . With Whole Life Insurance , however , you are getting a lifetime financial tool . Whole Life keeps growing and increasing in value and in death benefit . While you are living , you can use Whole Life to take money out and pay for college , pay towards a new home or even a new car , or any emergency . You do not have to cancel Whole Life , you can simply take some money out of it , while continuing to allow it to grow , as though the funds were still in the Whole Life Policy . The premium will NEVER change , although you death benefit can growth an enormous amount . Your family is protect , and you never have to worry about being without life insurance with Whole Life . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
The answer to any financial question should always be prefaced by `` it depends on the need of the individual '' . That said , there are significant benefits for someone who owns a whole life participating policy . Whole life , a form of permanent life insurance , features guaranteed premiums , death benefits and cash value . Whole life policies also give you the potential to receive dividends which can increase the value of the policy or provide an increased death benefit for beneficiaries . Unlike term , the death benefit will last your entire lifetime and the monthly premium will be locked in at the date of policy inception according to your `` rating '' . So , if you are 35 and get rated `` Preferred Non-tobacco '' that will give you a monthly premium that will not change for your entire life , regardless of any health issues - as long as your premiums are current . The second important value of whole life insurance is the accumulation of cash inside the policy on a tax-deferred basis . Over time , the cash value increases can be significant and you can borrow cash from your policy at a favorable interest rate . Many people have used this as a source for college funding or even a retirement income stream later in life . These policy loans are generally tax free . There is a lot more to Whole Life policies that can be addressed when considering your personal situation and I would recommend contacting an independent insurance agent that can review your particular needs and situation .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Job Is Cheapest For Car Insurance ?
Great question ! Unless you are using the car for a business purpose , there usually is n't a reason for the rate to be different one way or the other . If you are using the car for business , then you really want to have it insured as a business vehicle , because if you are involved in an accident and the adjuster finds that you had been using it in a company capacity , your family coverage may not be accepted . I know of several cases where the magnetic advertisement on the car caused the claim to be denied . Thanks for asking !
In California occupation is not a rating criterion . The cheapest Auto policy is one that a company issues for you on your car . This is particularly true if the policy is in force on the day you have an accident . This is even truer if the limits of the policy are adequate to take care of every aspect of the claim . Anything else is too expensive ; you can buy low limits , save a small amount and be a huge looser when you have an accident .
The cheapest car insurance for young drivers depends on many factors including your age , type of vehicle , driving record and where you live . An experienced broker , along with their website will provide you with the best chance of getting the best rates . That 's our job - Finding the cheapest prices from the most reputable companies .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
First , take care of your risks - health insurance , car insurance , home/renters insurance , life insurance . Second , you need a stash of emergency cash . I make it rhyme so it 's easy to remember . $ 1,000 - $ 2,000 is a good start . Get a safe & start sticking it in there . Crap happens - someone in India wipes out your account and it takes a week or two to get the bank to give you back your money . Third , open a savings account and save at least three months of your household expenses but six months is better . Again , crap happens and if you have to change jobs , you may need a 3-6 month cushion to find another job . Fourth , max out your company 's 401k to the extent of the company matching . That means for every dollar you put in , you DOUBLE your money guaranteed . Fifth , this is where you get into long term financial planning . Do some networking , attend some seminars , ask friends . I personally like mutual funds & annuities but everyone will give you different answers . Find a plan that meets your risk tolerance and a company you trust . You will hear a lot of noise about fees but keep it in perspective - are you getting what you pay for ? It 's not like gasoline where you get the same gas no matter where you fill up so always look for the cheapest . Different products offer different services for different fees .
Health insurance , if you are unemployed , can be very inexpensive . A short-term temporary plan will be the cheapest type of available coverage and you can be approved within 24 hours . As an experienced broker , our job is to find you the cheapest coverage that provides the benefits you need . In 2014 , you may also qualify for a federal subsidy that could lower your premium .
As good life insurance policy is one that is in force the day that you die . I suppose you could speculate that the cheapest life insurance policy is one that was scheduled to reach the end of its term the day following your death . If you know when you are going to die , I can tell you which policy is cheapest . Since few of us know this the choice we generally make is which policy will give me all the coverage that I need during the time frames in which I need it . As for the name of the company , please understand that life insurance companies are highly regulated . Your state insurance commissioners job is to make sure that the death claim is paid when it is owed . Money from a B - insurance company is just as negotiable as an A + company .
The cheapest car insurance for new drivers will potentially save hundreds of dollars . To get the best rate , it 's important to utilize an experienced broker that will research , compare and show you the best prices . That 's our job and we use our expertise and websites to find the best offers . Naturally , where you live , the type of car you drive and driving record will impact your savings .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
To apply and purchase auto insurance , you will need to provide your name , address , types of cars you own , other family members and some driving information . Experienced brokers -LRB- it 's our job -RRB- will shop and compare the best rates for you and show you the cheapest options . At that point , it 's up to you whether you care to apply .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
You should really ask , `` which company offers the best value in disability insurance in Wisconsin '' . `` Cheapest '' often ends up being a poorly written plan of insurance , which might not pay benefits when you might expect them to . Much depends on your age , your occupation , your income , medical history , and tobacco use . An old mentor of mine used to preach `` never buy the cheapest parachute , the cheapest elevator or the cheapest motorcycle helmet ; they might not work when you need it to work ! '' I am located in the Milwaukee area , call me at 262-240-9933 if you want to talk .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
The cost of Critical Care Insurance varies according to the age of the applicant , whether or not they use tobacco , their BMI , if they have a family history of certain illnesses , and whether they themselves have any health conditions . Therefore , what is the cheapest Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan for one person , may not be the cheapest for another . To find the cheapest quote for you , go to a website that offers Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan and call or visit them .
The cheapest car insurance for new drivers depends upon where you live , what type of vehicle you drive , how man tickets and accidents you have , and the type of coverage you want . An experienced broker with a top-rated website -LRB- That 's what we do best ! -RRB- saves customers up to 45 % in premiums by shopping and comparing the best available options . So to get the best rates and find the cheapest policy , utilize a broker . It 's free and you 'll save time and money .
The cheapest renter 's policy is the one that pays the full amount of a claim and leaves you paying nothing more than the deductible . Everything else costs too much ! You probably wanted to know what company or type of company is cheapest but that is not really a bargain . Having enough coverage with a company that will pay the claim is the cheapest way you can go .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Everyone wants to pay less for car insurance butbe careful purchasingthe cheapest policy . Purchasing the cheapest policy onlinemay cost you severly down the road . For example , a home owner in Virginia recentlypurchased a policy online with state minmium limits . The policy was $ 15 less per month so he decided to switch . Two months later he was hit by an uninsured driver and in the hospital for 3 months . The new policy he purchased did not cover his car much less his medical bills . Cheaper is notbetter sowhen it comes to insurance focus on finding the best value .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Key Life Insurance ?
Key Life Insurance , often called Key Man or Key Person Life Insurance , is a policy that is taken out on a `` key '' employee of a business . The business usually pays for the policy and receives the benefits so that it has the funds to look for a new employee and not suffer financially in the interim , if that key employee should pass .
Key Life Insurance , often referred to as Key man or Key person Life Insurance is usually purchased by business The business is the beneficiary to receive funds to aid in the transition in the event of the Key employee 's death .
Many business owners purchase life insurance on their key personnel or business partners . Some businesses use life insurance in deferred compensation plans to fund executive compensation . Key personnel can be any employee that impacts the company , i.e. from rainmakers to the top admin person who runs the firm .
Key Person -LRB- Key Man -RRB- is a life insurance policy purchased with the intention of compensating the business for the loss of services of an important -LRB- key -RRB- person due death . Often the key person is a `` rainmaker '' that is responsible for a significant portion of the business revenue . In some situations the loss of the key person can create a financial strain on the business , even to the point of forcing the business to close or sell at a loss . In a key person life insurance plan , the key person is the insured ; the business is the owner , premium payer and beneficiary . Key person premiums are not tax deductible to the business . The policy proceeds are not taxable .
The death of a key employee or shareholder most often would affect the profits , financial strength and stability of the company . Creditors , customers , employees and suppliers could lose confidence in the business at the death of a key person , especially , if the key person is the owner . Key person life insurance is insurance , purchased by the business to deliver cash at death to provide solutions such as the loss of a key employee and for the funding of buy sell agreements between shareholders . In Canada , when a company owns and is beneficiary of a life insurance policy , the death benefit is received tax free . The funds can then be used by the company for its purposes . The death benefit less the Net Cost of Pure Insurance -LRB- NCPI -RRB- can be paid out as a tax free dividend to surviving shareholders . With careful planning , the key person protection can be designed to also provide executive benefits . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A Key Man Life Insurance policy is life insurance that covers the life of key persons in a business . These are employees who represent the top producers and/or leadership in the company , and who would take some time to replace . Key Person insurance provides money to keep the business in the black while this new key employee is found . Key Man Life Insurance can be Term or Permanent , and it can be owned by the business or by the employer .
Key man life insurance is for an employee in a business or organization whose loss would put a financial strain on that business or group . Some types of persons who should own key person insurance are top sales people , people who have much knowledge based on years of experience , managers of lots of employees , and/or key decision makers . All these positions take time to develop and to find the right person to replace that key employee . The key man insurance provides money to do the recruiting and operation while the key person is being replaced and trained .
Key Life Insurance , often called Key Man or Key Person Life Insurance , is a policy that is taken out on a `` key '' employee of a business . The business usually pays for the policy and receives the benefits so that it has the funds to look for a new employee and not suffer financially in the interim , if that key employee should pass .
Lets suppose you own a business . Obviously you cant do everything yourself , so you need to hire people with special skills . Collectively you can get to where you want to go . The people with special skills might include a high-ranking executive . Might also include a highly skilled technician . Perhaps a top salesman . All these people play roles that are key to the operation . And you , as the entrepreneur of the enterprise , are very much a key person too . This is not to say that people who are not key do not bring value to the company and are not important . If all the business needed was key people , why would you hire anybody else ? But key people are the ones whose loss would create the biggest problems . Sales could go down . Vendors might not get paid . Clients might get nervous about orders being filled . Banks might think twice about lending money . You need to protect your business against the loss of these people . If any or all of them disappeared tomorrow , you need to be sure that your business can go full speed ahead . Employees , clients , prospects , vendors , lenders , investors , and everyone else related to your business , need to be reassured that business will take place as usual . And that takes money . If you have the exact amount of money you need exactly when you need it , then you could tell people to not worry . Orders will get filled . Bills will get paid . You can take the time needed to find the right replacement . And you dont want to have to set up an investment program to cover these people . Nor do you want to have to borrow the money . You want this coverage to come as cheaply as possible without any hoops to jump through . That is what life insurance does when it is purchased for key person coverage .
One example of key person life insurance would be to guarantee a quick and easy sale of the business upon the owner 's death . For example If the owner has a wife and children that are not active in the business and would have no idea how to run it , they would probably sell it in a distressed manner if the owner died unexpectedly . If he has a key manager that would be the likely person to sell it to they can purchase a life insurance policy on the owner 's life with the key man as the policy owner . The business can bonus the money to pay the premium to the key man . An attorney will write up a buy-sell agreement and the if the owner dies , his manager has the money and an agreed on price to buy the business from the widow . This makes the transition much easier for the widow PLUS has the benefit of keeping your key employee from straying off and being attracted to greener pastures . When there are multiple business owners , they each need a life policy on each other plus a legal agreement so they can buy out the spouse 's interests if one of them dies . They do n't want a business partner just because she/he happened to be married to their former business partner .
Key Man DI -LRB- also known as Key Person DI -RRB- is a coverage that would pay benefits to a business to cover the financial loss if a vital employee became disabled due to an illness or injury . Any business that would find it hard to replace an employee , or any business that wouldnt be able to function without a specific employee , needs Key Man DI . And if a company had more than one key person whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then DI can be purchased for more than one Key Man . ''
Key Life Insurance , often referred to as Key man or Key person Life Insurance is usually purchased by business The business is the beneficiary to receive funds to aid in the transition in the event of the Key employee 's death .
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
With Key Person disability insurance , if a vital employee becomes disabled , the business will receive disability income to cover the financial loss of the missing employee . And if a business has more than one key employee whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then Key Person disability insurance can be purchased for more than one person in the business . Any business that would find it hard to replace a vital employee needs Key Person disability insurance . Much like the saying , if a business puts all its eggs in the basket of one person , it wont be able to sustain itself should that person become disabled .
I am not sure life insurance is a bother . You should purchase life insurance if you have a loved one in your life that depends on your income , would be saddled with your debt or would be responsible for your final expenses , i.e. funeral if you died today . If these statements are not true , then do n't bother with life insurance on a personal level . However , if you are in a business partnership or key to a business success then perhaps you need life insurance known as buy/sell insurance or key man insurance . This is if the business would suffer without you or your partner or a key employee . If these aspects do n't exist , then perhaps you should not bother with life insurance at all .
The term Key employee or key man or business life insurance all deal with the same type of life insurance policy . It is a term or permanent life insurance policy owned and paid for by the companywith the company named as the beneficiary . The sole purpose is to recover a financial loss incurred by the sudden death of this `` key man or woman '' . The person is so important to the business success that a business could actually go under or have to restructure .
The reason businesses buy key man life insurance is to help the business survive when a key principal or employee dies . Even if the business must be closed due to the death of that employee , the death benefit paid out by a key man life insurance policy can help pay the business close in an orderly fashion , rather than file bankruptcy .
The only way to answer this is to look at your situation and determine why you should consider having Life Insurance . Here are some examples why you would consider having a Life Insurance . you are married . A life policy would pay off any expenses and help to maintain the standard of living you currently have or perhaps want to provide the means to improve the living standard . you have children . This is a common reason . Have coverage to support your spouse until the kids move out . Perhaps you want to make sure the children have the means to go to college if you were to die prematurely . your a partner owning a business . Life Insurance is used for Key Person & Buy-Sell agreements . Key Person pays the company for lost income if a Key -LRB- important -RRB- employee passes while the company looks for someone to replace you . Buy-Sell purchases the ownership of your partners half that would otherwise fall to the family , surviving spouse . you have a bank loan . Sometimes , depending on the structure of a loan , you might be required to have Life Insurance which would pay the loan back upon your untimely death . This is one way a bank may minimize the risk on the loan defaulting . There are just 4 examples which are common . There are many other situations where it is good to have Life Insurance . Contact your agent/broker to discuss your situation .
Key person life insurance covers employees who are big contributors to the income that companies bring in -LRB- e.g. top salesmen , designers , engineers -RRB- , are managers , or are other key employees . This type of worker can be hard to replace , and the time it takes to replace them can result in losses to the company . Therefore , key person life insurance can help alleviate those losses and give the company some finances to help them recruit a replacement .
Split dollar is not a type of life insurance policy but rather , when used by a business , is an arrangement that allocates the policy benefits between the business and the key employee . Typically , the business assists the key employee by paying the premium while the key employee receives most of the policy benefits . The business ultimately recovers its total outlay from policy benefits . The employee receives a valuable life insurance benefit for a very low out of pocket cost .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Do I Enroll In Medicare ?
You enroll in Medicare when you decide to retire and/or if your employer tells you they will not cover you on their group plan after age 65 . When you turn 65 you automatically get Part A . If you will remain on a company group plan then it 's best to postpone Part B until you decide to retire . If your benefits department tells you they do not offer benefits once you turn 65 then you would get both Medicare Part A & B . You should also look into a Medicare Supplement Plan at the same time because Part A & B only will cover about 80 % . You can start reviewing your options 6 months out so you will have plenty of time to make a decision . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement Plan is actually great insurance . Most people find that the benefits are equal to or greater than what you had with your company group plan . If you pay for your group benefits or are on an individual/family policy you may even save money when you go onto Medicare with a supplement .
Medicare Insurance covers American employees when they retire . It begins at age 65 and once you are 643/4 years old you can begin the process of enrolling . Medicare comes in two parts ; Part A covers medical insurance and Part B covers doctor charges . In addition you can have Part D for prescriptions .
You can enroll in Medicare 3 months prior to your 65th birthday and the month of birthday plus 3 months after your 65th birthday . This is referred to as your `` initial enrollment '' and a company can not ask you any health questions and they can not turn you down or rate your policy because of any health issues . It is important for all individuals to be mindful if your budget can stand the expense of a medicare supplement plus a prescription drug plan then you may be well advised to not enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan because if you do and then you want to come back to original medicare for you to obtain at medicare supplement policy you will be subject to underwriting and if you have conditions that are unacceptable then you will not be able to get a medicare supplement policy . Also I hope everyone is aware that if you fail to enroll in a Part D plan there is a penalty for late enrollment
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . When enrolling under a special enrollment period , the effective date would be the 1st of the following month after you apply . The effective date of coverage when applying during the general enrollment period will be July 1 of the year you apply . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . Please note , when you enroll in Part B during the general enrollment period , your effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
You will enrolled for Medicare Part A automatically when you turn 65 . If you are receiving Social Securiy you will be enrolled in Part B automatically and Social Security will start deducting your Part B premium from your monthly Social Security Benefit . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits Medicare will notify you 4 to 6 months prior to your Medicare open enrollment period that you are eligible for Medicare the first day of your birth month on your 65th birthday . Your Open Enrollment Period is a 7-month period beginning 3-months before your 65th birthday and 3-months after . You can reply to the Medicare enrollment reminder to enroll you in Medicare or you can decline Part B . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits you will have to pay the first 3-months of your Part B premium by check or money order . You can decline Part B without penalty as long as you are enrolled in an qualified employer health care plan . If you are not enrolled in such a plan you will be penalized 10 % each year when or if you apply for Part B . You can also use the Medicare.gov website to enroll online .
Enrollment in a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan -LRB- Part D / PDP -RRB- is not mandatory . However , if you do not enroll in a Medicare approved Prescription Drug Plan , youll still need creditable prescription drug coverage to avoid a late enrollment penalty if you decide to enroll later on . To avoid the late enrollment penalty : Join a Medicare drug plan when you are first eligible and before your initial enrollment period is over . Dont allow 63 days or more in a row without a Medicare drug plan or other creditable prescription drug coverage . If you choose to delay getting a PDP plan , you are not penalized until you decide to enroll . This does come as a surprise to some people who choose to wait to buy a Medicare PDP plan after being on Medicare for some time . To calculate a late enrollment penalty fee , first determine how many months you went without creditable drug coverage . For example 43 months at a rate of $ 31.17 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- is 43 X .3117 = $ 13.40 . So , in addition to the monthly PDP premium , you would pay a $ 13.40 late enrollment penalty . You may have to pay this penalty for as long as you have a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan . In addition , the penalty rate may increase each year . This was a great question . I hope this answer was helpful .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Medicare Part B has several enrollment periods that you should be aware of . The enrollment period that you may qualify for may vary based on what your current situation is . The first Medicare Part B enrollment period that most people experience is the `` Initial Enrollment Period '' . This is a 7 month window that starts 6 months before the first day of the month in which you turn 65 and lasts 6 months after the month in which you turn 65 . If you enroll in Part B using this enrollment period your medicare Part B will start on the first day of the month you turn 65 or if you enroll after your 65 birthday your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month . The Part B `` General Enrollment Period '' is for individuals over 65 that do not currently have medicare part B or other creditable health coverage . This period is from Jan 1st through march 31st every year . If you enroll in part B using this General Enrollment Period your Part B coverage will start on July 1st of the same year . There is also a `` Special Enrollment Period '' that begins 63 days before and ends 63 days after the date you lost creditable health coverage from an active employer . You may also qualify for an 8 month Enrollment period that begins on the day you lose employment and/or employment based group health coverage .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan . If you have any questions about your coverage or would like to review options for a Medicare supplement plan , please send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or call me at 703-665-9133 .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . Some people may be on Medicare before age 65 -LRB- certain requirements must be met such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan .
A special enrollment period for original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- is a qualification to enroll in Medicare immediately without having to wait for the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- if you did not sign up for Medicare when you were first eligible -LRB- turning age 65 -RRB- - enrolling during a special enrollment period would also allow you to avoid being subject to any late enrollment penalties . With regards to special enrollment periods for Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- and Part D -LRB- stand-alone prescription drug plans -RRB- , it 's a qualification to make changes to your program outside of the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 of each year -RRB- - Medicare supplement plans -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plans -RRB- can be changed at any time during the year . There are a number of ways someone may qualify for a special enrollment period , the most common one I see being a person leaving their employer 's group health insurance plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No . While most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 , some people can enroll before then . They must meet certain eligibility requirements such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan .
Yes , however , the best time to sign up for Part B is during your initial enrollment period when you turn 65 . If you choose not to enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible , you can enroll during the General Enrollment Period - January 1st to March 31st of each year . When you do this , the effective date will be July 1st . You may be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you do n't sign up when you 're first eligible : an additional 10 % is added to your premium for every year you did not have the coverage . You can avoid this penalty if you qualify for a special enrollment period - the most common way this happens is coming off of a group plan . A special enrollment period is an 8-month window to enroll in Part B without the penalty being tacked on to the premium . If you enroll during this 8-month window , the effective date would become the first day of the following month .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . Some people may be on Medicare before age 65 -LRB- certain requirements must be met such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
If you are turning 65 - you can enroll up to 3 months prior to your 65th birthday with the effective date of plan being effective the first of the month - of your birth month . If you enroll a bit after -LRB- you have up to 3 months after birth month to enroll with a guarantee issue -RRB- then it would be effective the first of the month following your enrollment . So let 's say your birthday is in May : You can sign up for Medicare A & B , and your additional plan -LRB- s -RRB- Feb , March , April , May , June July and August . After that you are no longer guarantee issue and would need to wait till another enrollment period . NOW , if you are working full time and retire , this gives you yet another guarantee issue enrollment period at the month of retirement . -LRB- You still want to enroll in Medicare A & B up to 3 months before retirement - and then the additional plan -LRB- s -RRB- about 1-2 months before that start date of Medicare A & B. -RRB- If you are already enrolled in Medicare and would like to change your RX plan for 2015 then during the `` Annual Enrollment '' period , which is Oct 15th - Dec 7th 2014 - with an effective date of Jan 1 2015 , then you would want to make sure to meet with your agent during this time period . Make sure you , or they , run your RX list through a comparison tool - such as Medicare.gov - to see which of the many plans may best fit your needs . Anyone enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan or a Supplement along with an RX plan will want to review your Advantage plan or your RX plan every year during this `` Annual Enrollment '' period as plans change and your prescriptions may have changed . Always search for what may fit your needs best . If you have a Supplement plan - you typically do not ever change this plan for another - there are exceptions . Hope that clarifies . Belinda myseniorventure.com/answers
When you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older you will be in your initial Medicare Open Enrollment Period to purchase a Medicare Supplement . You have six month from when your Part B takes effect to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately with no waiting period . You can purchase a Medicare Supplement anytime you want to outside of your initial Open Enrollment Period but once your Open Enrollment Period ends you will have to answer all health questions to qualify for a Medicare Supplement . If you have a serious health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium to get the pre-existing health condition covered .
Everyone should sign up for Medicare Part A & Part B when you 're first eligible -LRB- generally this is when you 're turning 65 years old -RRB- so you do n't get hit with any late enrollment penalties -LRB- there are ways to avoid the late enrollment penalty such as signing up when you 're coming off group health insurance -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you begin your initial open enrollment period -LRB- a 6-month timeframe -RRB- to apply for a Medicare supplement policy with no medical underwriting . You can apply for Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . If you need quotes for Medicare supplements , send me a private message and we can go over the input so we can find the program that 's right for you .
Asking this question tells me that you need the help of a health insurance broker familiar with your marketplace . Do a Google search , call the Better Business Bureau , look in the Yellow Pages -LRB- if any one does that anymore -RRB- , ask a friend , but get somebody to do the leg work for you . Or , of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov and look up coverage there . When using HealthCare.Gov the consumer should understand that not all health insurance carriers are available through the government marketplaces and that provider networks and approved prescription lists may be different with the same carrier depending upon whether you are dealing with their products outside or inside of the government marketplaces . One good thing about ObamaCare is that the simple answer to your question is just `` apply with an insurance carrier . '' The bad news about ObamaCare is that they now give you a specific time of year -LRB- the open enrollment -RRB- for you to enroll in coverage and after that time only persons experiencing certain change of life status events can enroll for individual coverage outside the open enrollment period each year . You are asking this question nearly 2 months after the close of the first open enrollment period on March 31st , 2014 . If you could have enrolled during that open enrollment period but for some reason did n't and have n't experienced a change of life status event -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , having a baby , losing employer based coverage -RRB- recently then you technically ca n't enroll in major medical insurance again until January 1 , 2015 . Being uninsured will also technically make you subject to the individual mandate tax penalty when you do your individual income taxes next year . Do n't feel all alone , millions of people went through the first ObamaCare enrollment and still managed to stay uninsured . Some by intention other by inattention . If you can pass a few simple medical questions and coverage for pre-existing conditions is n't a must then I would suggest you look into getting a Short Term Medical policy to tide you over for the rest of the year . Be advised that Short Term Medical insurance is not viewedas meeting the requirements under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual mandate penalty . But , many people are finding that the cost of short term medical insurance is low enough against the prices of the new ObamaCare compliant plans that even taking the tax penalty into account they are dollars ahead with the short term policy . For advise please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is Usually Covered In Renters Insurance ?
Typically your personal property is covered by a renters insurance policy up to the policy limits and less your deductible . Liability coverage is also provided to help provide coveragefor accidents on your rented premise that you are deemed responsible for . There are many , many coverages offered by a renters policy . Contact a local agent to allow them to provide you with informationthe coverages and pricing with your area .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance is usually associated with the owner of the dwelling ; whereas Renters Insurance is specifically intended for the non-owner occupant of the dwelling . Renters Insurance is intended to provide Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Coverage for the tenant of a home . In a tenant occupied situation , the owner of the dwelling will usually carry Landlords Protection Coverage for the dwelling which does not offer any protection to the tenant . The tenant should purchase his/her own Renters Insurance . This is coverage is very inexpensive and is well worth it ; there have been many instances where a property owner has brought legal action against a tenant for negligence leading to a fire or other type of claim ; the Renters Insurance provides Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant which may provide defense in such an occurrence . For a renters quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you should find a licensed representative in your State for a quote .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
The entity that is renting the property to the ` renter or renters ' is typically the homeowner policyholder . It could be an organization , corporation or individual who holds the homeowner policy . The owner of the residence pays for their own policy . They are the ` landlord ' in common terms . The renter may be required by the owner , to carry a renter 's insurance policy but the two policies are different . Even if the renter is not required to have a renter 's policy , it is a wise move to purchase one , as the premiums are usually relatively low and the coverages are fairly extensive , primarily for losses and damages to personal property and also for liability coverage for accidental injury to others .
Renter 's Insurance is not required by state law , but many landlords will require that you carry renter 's insurance as part of your lease agreement . This is because Renter 's Insurance comes with liability insurance protection , so , in some cases , if you damage the premises , they can collect from your Renter 's Insurance policy . That coverage usually applies for accidentally created fires -LRB- for example -RRB- . Fortunately , most people can buy Renter 's insurance for about $ 10 - $ 12 per month -LRB- it might be less and some basic policies only cost about $ 5.00 / month -RRB- . Send me an email and I can get you a rate !
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Where Do I Sign Up For Medicare Online ?
That is a great question ! You can go directly to the Government 's site for Medicare , WEBSITELINK to enroll . I will not lie , it looks confusing , but it is really very simple . Look for the drop box that is what you are looking for , and follow the prompts . If you are not very computer savvy , have a family member you trust help you , or as Jason suggested , your Social Security office case worker . If you need help , please contact me , and I 'll be happy to help , okay ? Thanks for asking !
If you are signing up far enough in advance then SSA.gov will make it easy for you . If you are in a time crunch and getting close to the effective date you may want to visit your local Social Security office . However , signing up for Medicare Part A & B will not cover everything for you . I suggest looking into a Medicare Supplement plan to cover what Part A & B does not . There are many plans out there so I suggest contacting a independent agent that specializes in Medicare Supplement plans . They will be able to save you a lot of time and money picking the plan that fits your needs the best .
You can sign up to receive Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . I believe you can click on `` Medicare '' under the benefits tab . There should be some easy instructions there that will walk you through the sign up process . Signing up online is preferable for those applying during their initial enrollment period -LRB- 3 months before age 65 , the month you turn 65 , and the 3 months after you turn age 65 -RRB- . If you 're applying under special enrollment , I recommend going down to your local social security office to get your paperwork processed . Please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you are age 65 and have begun receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare Part A and B . You can sign up for an Advantage Plan or get Medicare Part D -LRB- or other letters -RRB- at that time , as well . You sign up for Medicare by visiting your local Social Security office , going to Medicare.gov -LRB- where you will be directed to a website where you can sign up -RRB- , or calling 1-800-MEDICARE .
You should sign up for Medicare three months before reaching age 65 , even if you plan to delay receiving retirement benefits because you are working . Otherwise , your Medicare medical insurance , as well as prescription drug coverage , could be delayed , and you could be charged higher premiums . You can sign up for Medicare even if you are not ready to start receiving retirement benefits . You can opt out of receiving cash retirement benefits now once you are in the online application . Then you can apply online for retirement benefits later . Source for above : medicare.gov This also means you can sign up for a Medicare Advantage Plan or a Medicare Supplement and/or a Prescription drug plan . If you have any questions contact me or go to the site
You can sign up for Medicare online at medicare.gov . If you are nearing age 65 , you can sign up in the three months before or after the month of your 65th birthday . If you would rather sign up by phone , you can call 1-800-MEDICARE -LRB- 1-800-633-4227 -RRB- . Or you can go to your local Social Security Office to sign up for Medicare .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B online at medicare.gov . The website offers information about when and how to apply , along with a form that you can fill in and submit online . If you would rather call to sign up , you can call Social Security at1-800-772-1213 . Or you can sign up at your local Social Security office .
You can sign up to receive Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . I believe you can click on `` Medicare '' under the benefits tab . There should be some easy instructions there that will walk you through the sign up process . Signing up online is preferable for those applying during their initial enrollment period -LRB- 3 months before age 65 , the month you turn 65 , and the 3 months after you turn age 65 -RRB- . If you 're applying under special enrollment , I recommend going down to your local social security office to get your paperwork processed . Please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can sign up to receive Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . I believe you can click on `` Medicare '' under the benefits tab . There should be some easy instructions there that will walk you through the sign up process . Signing up online is preferable for those applying during their initial enrollment period -LRB- 3 months before age 65 , the month you turn 65 , and the 3 months after you turn age 65 -RRB- . If you 're applying under special enrollment , I recommend going down to your local social security office to get your paperwork processed .
The main way to qualify for Medicare is to be turning 65 year sold . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care .
Medicare Part D , where do I apply ? What is the doughnut hole and how does it work ? How much does Medicare Part D cost ? Can I sign up for Part D at any time ? Which plan is the best one for me ? All good questions . The answer to where do you apply is this . You can apply through Medicare.gov You can sign up direct through a carrier Or you can find a good local insurance agent that specializes in Medicare plans
You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to the website medicare.gov . There is an online form that explains about Medicare Part B and allows you to sign up right there . Or you can visit your local Social Security office to sign up , or call Social Security at 1-800-633-4227 .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
You can sign up for Medicare Part A and Part B online at WEBSITELINK . Or you can visit your local Social Security office to sign up . A website where you can input your zip code to find the address of your local Social Security Office is at this link : WEBSITELINK r you can call Social Security Medicare at 1-800-772-1213 . If you worked for the Railroad , call the Railroad Retirement Board at 1-877-772-5772 .
Go to WEBSITELINK to apply for Medicare online . This page is the government page to apply for Medicare online . You can not use this page is you want to activate your social security at the same time . This page is for Medicare online enrollment only . If you already have Medicare Part A and want to sign up for Medicare Part B you should call Social Security at -LRB-800-RRB-772-1213 to activate your Part B coverage .
If you signed up for Medicare Part A & Part B during your initial enrollment period , then your effective date will be either the first of the month you turn 65 -LRB- this is the case for most individuals -RRB- or 2 or 3 months after -LRB- if you signed up after the month you turned 65 -RRB- . If you decided to wait because you were still working -LRB- e.g. on a group health plan through your employer -RRB- , then you may be eligible for a special enrollment period and set up an effective date for the first of the following month -LRB- you 'll likely need to complete the Part B enrollment at your local social security office -RRB- . If you decided to wait on signing up for Part B and do not have a special enrollment period , then you would be looking at signing up during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . If you 're signing up during this window , then your effective date would be July 1 .
Car insurance can start immediately . When you sign up for auto insurance , either directly through the insurance company -LRB- typically done online -RRB- or through an agent , you have the option of setting the effective date of the policy . For example , if you are purchasing a new car you can sign up for insurance at the auto dealer online and print out proof of insurance immediately . Even if you purchase new auto insurance through an agent he/she can draft a proof of auto insurance on an ACORD form for you in the office .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B at the same time that you sign up for Medicare Part A , or you can wait to sign up for Part B until you have stopped working and no longer have group coverage . If you are receiving Social Security benefits , you will be signed up for Part A and B automatically just before your 65th birthday .
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Robbery ?
Most home insurance covers theft and robbery , subject to a deductible and certain limitations on various items such as jewelry , computer equipment and firearms . If you have more of these type of things than your insurance covers talk with your agent and for a small extra premium you can either schedule these items or purchase extended coverage . Always make sure you take your deductible into consideration before filing a claim . It may not be worthwhile .
Most home insurance covers theft and robbery , subject to a deductible and certain limitations on various items such as jewelry , computer equipment and firearms . If you have more of these type of things than your insurance covers talk with your agent and for a small extra premium you can either schedule these items or purchase extended coverage . Always make sure you take your deductible into consideration before filing a claim . It may not be worthwhile .
Depending on your policy yes , most renters insurance covers robbery and theft . It is always a good idea to keep receipts or pictures of any expensive items you have in your home . Some companies will require proof that you actually had the articles you are claiming . Unfortunatelythis is an area where a great deal of insurance fraud takes place so by taking pictures and keeping receipts you are protecting yourself and the company .
Most homeowners insurance polices are written on a special form that covers burglary . Even if your front door was left unlocked or a window open a robber is still a robbery and you would have coverage minus your deductible . Make sure you obtain a police report and make a list of all items stolen . Any receipts or pictures are very helpful in a claims process .
There are essentially two parts to an auto insurance policy . Liability coverage , or as some refer to it as PL/PD and physical damage coverage . Most states require some form of liability coverage in order to drive your vehicle legally . But physical damage is an optional coverage you can purchase to protect your vehicle . The most common coverage you will find under the physical damage is comprehensive and collision coverage . Where collision coverage covers just that , collision with another vehicle , comprehensive coverage picks up other than collision coverages . Comprehensive provides coverage for losses from fire , theft , hail , falling objects , glass breakage and car/animal accidents . Comprehensive provides coverage for loss or damage to your vehicle and its equipment cause by theft , larceny or robbery . It also provides coverage in the event you are tricked into giving your vehicle to another person under false pretenses . Please note that you are subject to your deductible in the event of a loss . What this means is that the insurance company will pay you for the loss less your deductible which may range from $ 0 to $ 500 dollars depending on your insurance carrier . To stay competitive some insurance companies may offer special perks in their auto coverage such as waiving the deductibles or providing additional coverage such as rental car coverage in the event of theft . So be sure to check with your insurance agent or carrier to see if they provide this coverage .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
Home Insurance may cover appliances in home ; there are 2 types of appliances , those that are fitted and those that are free standing . Fitted appliances constitute part of the Dwelling Coverage on the home insurance policy , whereas , free standing appliances may be covered under the Personal Property Coverage on the home insurance policy . The perils covered under a home insurance policy must be reviewed regarding the damage to the appliances . For example , Fire , Smoke , Lightning & Water damage may be covered on the policy which would also carry forward to the appliances . Regarding free standing appliances , the policy must afford coverage for Personal Property . If this question was intended for the reason of upkeep and maintenance of appliances , home insurance policies are not intended to repair or replace appliances due to maintenance and/or breakdown . Home insurance is intended for sudden and accidental losses which could cause financial hardship to the homeowner . If you wish to cover your appliances , you may wish topurchase a Home Warranty Contract from a small handful of carriers who offer a maintenance contract ; in this case , you will pay an annual premium as well as a Service Charge for each call when a repair company is dispatched to take care of a covered maintenance situation . If your question was indeed regarding perils covered on a homeowners policy , you may wish to contact your local agent and review the coverage on your policy or WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your coverage for you at no charge .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Homeowners Insurance and Title Insurance are not the same . Title insurance is insurance to make sure the title of the home is clean . For example you are purchasing a home from Mr. Doe . The title company is to make sure all information is accurate such as who is the seller , boundaries are correct and so on . If you purchased the home from Mr. Doe and you find out later there also was a MS. Doe who says I never gave permission to sell the home now there is a problem and title insurance would step in to cover this situation . Homeowners insurance is what you purchase to cover your actual dwelling and property , liability etc. . . for a potential loss .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
All homeowners policies cover claims that result in the damage or destruction of covered property do to accidents . Your home policy does cover the damage to your home and personal property due to your furnace . But remember , the claim will not cover the repair or replacement of the furnace itself . Home insurance is not a repair and maintenance insurance . It only covers damage to your property as the result of an accident and will not cover the replacement or repair of items in your home . If you have any other questions about this subject please feel free to call me .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover some part-time home health services such as physical therapy , skilled nursing care , speech-language pathology servcies , etc. . Medicare does not pay for 24 hour home health care however , nor meals delivered to your home , personal care , and homemaker services . Please note , there are a number of conditions that must be met for Medicare to cover your home health care . If you need more than part-time/intermittent home care , Medicare will not cover the expenses . Home health care is very expensive and you can deplete your savings paying for it . For someone wanting 24-hour home health care to be covered by their insurance , they should look into securing a long-term care insurance policy . While long-term care can be an expensive type of insurance to have , you 're paying pennies on the dollar if you needed to make a claim on the coverage . There 's many moving parts to long-term care insurance . If you 're looking to secure this type of coverage , it 's most helpful to consult with an experienced broker to help build a policy that will best serve your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Most Home Insurance policies will only cover a vacant or unoccupied home for a short time -LRB- 60 or 90 days -RRB- before they impose coverage limitations . I have seen policies with much higher deductible for `` vacant '' homes . Most wo n't cover burst plumbing or theft/vandalism if the house is ruled vacant at the time of a claim . If you have a vacation home , most seasonal home policies understand that the house will be unoccupied for large periods of time , and address that in their coverage terms . There are vacant home policies that are designed for unoccupied homes . If your home is for sale , or has been unoccupied for a long periodic time I suggest you talk to an insurance agent about getting a vacant home policy . Foremost Insurance and Vacant Express are two companies that specialize in vacant home coverage .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
Keep in mind that if one insurance company will not insure your home that does not necessarily mean that your home is uninsurable . And to take it a step farther ... . just because your home does not qualify for insurance with the standard markets , this does n't mean that it will not qualify for a home with an excess / surplus lines carrier like Lloyd 's . Contacting the insurance department is a good idea as I know that PA has the `` Fair Plan '' and you can go to : WEBSITELINK for some additional info because your state might have a similar site to access . -- @MooneyInsurance
end question
start question
annuities
What Are SPIA Annuities ?
Single premium immediate annuities can be paid over lifetime income you cant outlive . The older the annuitant is the higher the mortality credit assigned to the annuity and in tandem with the credited interest rate can actually perform well even in a low interest rate environment were experiencing
SPIA stands for single premium immediate annuity . Which means , you receive a set amount of money on a regular basis , on an annuity you purchased with a single deposited premium . SPIA 's can be very practical , and especially beneficial for specific situations , including : retirement , terminal funding , pension terminations , and retired life buyouts . As well as individuals who have received a lump sum of money from a structured settlement of sorts , like : injury , divorce , or inheritance . The purpose of investing your money in an immediate annuity , is to have a steady income for the rest of your life ; by prolonging the principal without the risk of fluctuations in the financial markets . Plus there can be significant tax advantages , depending on the funding of the premium and the amount of income payments you elected to regularly receive .
There are two basic types of annuities : single premium immediate annuities -LRB- SPIA -RRB- and tax deferred annuities . If youre financially conservative and looking for immediate income now , SPIAs are a consideration . If youre in a high tax bracket and youre looking at tax deferral feature of annuities , then you have three crediting methods to consider : interest rate crediting , indexed crediting and separate sub account crediting . You need to establish your risk tolerance to determine which crediting method is right for you .
SPIA stands for single premium immediate annuity . Which means , you receive a set amount of money on a regular basis , on an annuity you purchased with a single deposited premium . SPIA 's can be very practical , and especially beneficial for specific situations , including : retirement , terminal funding , pension terminations , and retired life buyouts . As well as individuals who have received a lump sum of money from a structured settlement of sorts , like : injury , divorce , or inheritance . The purpose of investing your money in an immediate annuity , is to have a steady income for the rest of your life ; by prolonging the principal without the risk of fluctuations in the financial markets . Plus there can be significant tax advantages , depending on the funding of the premium and the amount of income payments you elected to regularly receive .
A `` single-premium immediate annuity -LRB- SPIA -RRB- '' is an annuity . That is to say , an annuity is defined as an income stream that continues until the annuitant dies when a person pays a lump sum of money -LRB- single premium -RRB- to an insurance company in exchange for that income stream -LRB- annuity -RRB- . So , the term `` single-premium immediate annuity '' is a bit redundant . Think of it as taking retirement money from a privately funded pension , except that , in this case , you are funding it with a one-time , lump-sum of money.The important thing to remember is that once you pay the single premium , that money is essentially `` gone '' . You have just `` purchased '' an income that you can not outlive.There are all sorts of ways to design the annuity -LRB- stream of income -RRB- . You can get a monthly check , quarterly check , annual check - just about any payment schedule you can think of . You can also have the annuity pay out completely should you die before the original single premium you gave to the insurance company gets paid out . Should you choose that option , you will need to name a `` beneficiary '' to receive the remainder of the payout.Annuities , in general , are complex insurance contracts and space is not provided here to go into all the details . But , be absolutely certain that an annuity is right for you before you fork over the money because once it is committed to the contract , you either ca n't get a refund or there are stiff surrender penalties associated with backing out of the deal . Work only with an experienced insurance professional that has a solid working knowledge of what annuities are , how they work , and whether or not it is in your best interest to own one . More advanced knowledge about annuities can be obtained by consumer-friendly websites online .
There is no accumulation period for immediate annuities . After you purchase the SPIA -LRB- Single Premium Immediate Annuity -RRB- with a single lump sum amount , you are able to begin receiving payments from the annuity almost immediately . Typically , you will receive your first payment one month after the immediate annuity is procured .
The proceeds from a life insurance payment can be used in any way the beneficiary sees fit . Many people will put it into their checking account , a savings account , buy a life insurance policy on themselves , invest some of it -LRB- e.g. retirement accounts , stock market , etc. -RRB- , spend some of it -LRB- i.e. paying off bills , funeral expenses , down payment on a house , etc. -RRB- . A SPIA can be a great option to consider as well . SPIAs are offering about 6-7 % interest on the funds right now and guarantee you an income stream for the rest of your life . The amount of the payout can be a factor in determining what may be most advantageous for you . If someone has a $ 50,000 payout , they may consider just putting it in their bank account or paying off debts . Someone with a $ 1,000,000 payout may decide to diversify the money 's usage by putting a portion away , pay off some debts , invest some it , and create an annuity . It 's helpful to consult with a financial advisor when trying to create a good course of action . Keep in mind though , a financial advisor/planner will likely have fees that they charge for their management of the funds . Please feel free to contact me for help . As an experienced insurance broker , I 've helped many clients who have had a claim figure out a good course of action for the use of the funds and I do not charge any fees for my services - as an insurance broker , I 'm compensated by the insurance company for sales of policies , I do not charge fees for my input . Thanks very much .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
What happens to an annuity upon death depends on the type of annuity you have and the contractual stipulations . If you have an annuity that was set up to pay out for the rest of your life , there may be not benefit paid upon your death . Some Life Annuities will return what was paid in or pay for a guaranteed number of years . A Joint with Last Survivor Annuity will continue payments to the spouse . For annuities that will are set up to pay a fixed number of years , annuity payments will continue to the beneficiaries just as if they did before . If the annuity was not yet annuitized , the proceeds must be received by the beneficiaries within 5 years . Contact your agent or the company through which your annuity was secured to understand the specifics about your particular contract .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Does Medicare Part D Start ?
You must enroll in Part D when you turn 65 or qualify for Medicare . You have the three months before , the month of , and three months after you turn 65 to enroll in a plan . The plans are administered through private insurance companies under the supervision of Medicare . If you fail to enroll when you are eligible you will be penalized by Medicare for each month you do not have creditable coverage . You may enroll in a plan or change your plan each year from October 15th through December 7th .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
If youdefinehaving insurance coverage for your prescription drugs when you are age 65 + as `` good '' when prior to the Bush administration 's implementation of this plan seniors on traditional Medicare did n't , then Medicare Part D is definitely a good thing . In fact , some would argue that Medicare Part D , with its pesky reliance on private insurance options and marketplace competition , is the only part of Medicare that has delivered on it 's promises of expanding coverage for a high utilization population segment and managed to come in under initial cost projections . Medicare Part D is just another level of Medicare coverage specifically designed to address prescription drug coverage . As with Medicare supplement plans , different insurance carriers offer Medicare Part D plans with different levels of coverage and price points for consumers to select from during their initial eligibility period and subsequent open enrollment renewal years . This means that the consumer is obliged to shop around because not all Medicare Part D plans are created equal , far from it . Most consumers would be well served to use the services of an insurance broker who is knowledgeable in the various Medicare Part D plans available in their marketplace .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medicare Part D is your prescription drug plan . It is a good idea to have a Part D plan in addition to a Medicare Supplement Plan . When someone turns 65 they go on Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B . They get Part D to cover prescriptions and a Medicare Supplement Plan to cover what Part A & B does not .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The Federal program known as Medicare does not have comprehensive prescription coverage . Medicare Part A covers hospitalization and Medicare Part B covers doctors visits . Medicare Part D is the prescription drug coverage and Medicare Part C is a plan that combines Parts A & B -LRB- and often D -RRB- into one plan . Both Parts C & D are run by private insurance companies which contract with the Federal government to offer these plans .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
This can be a bit confusing : when you use the word Part you are referring to Medicare . When you use the word Plan , you are referring to Medigap plans which are sometimes referred to as Medicare `` supplements . '' As indicated in an earlier post , Medicare Part C is Medicare Advantage . Medigap Plans are identified individually as plans A through G , and K through N There are Medigap Plans A , B , C , & D , which tends to confuse people because Medicare Has Parts A , B , C , & D. For more information on Medicare Parts A , B , C , & D , refer to page 15 in your Medicare and You 2016 handbook . For more information on all Medigap Plans , refer to page 101 in your Medicare and You 2016 handbook . You can download a copy of the Medicare and You 2016 handbook ; go to : WEBSITELINK
According to Social Security , you are automatically enrolled in Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . The two parts of Medicare coverage you are enrolled in are the hospital insurance and medical insurance . Hospital insurance -LRB- Part A -RRB- is established to help pay for your inpatient hospital bills and some of your follow-up care . The taxes you paid while working helped pay for Part A coverage , so it 's no cost to you . Medical insurance -LRB- Part B -RRB- is provided to help pay your doctors ' bills , outpatient hospital care , and some other medical services . If you choose to enroll in Part B , this coverage comes with a monthly premium . Some other parts of Medicare include : Medicare Advantage -LRB- Part C -RRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- Part C plans are made available in many areas across the country . Part C allows you to receive all of your health care services through medical plans offered by Medicare approved private companies . Once you are on Medicare , you also have access to Part D or Prescription Drug Coverage . This type of coverage helps pay for your doctor prescribed medication . If you are a Medicare Beneficiary with low-income , you may be able to get assistance through your state for the payment of your Medicare premiums . To see if you qualify for assistance , it is best to contact your state or local Medicaid agency or welfare office .
Medicare is a federal government-run health insurance program for individuals age 65 and older -LRB- and those on disability or have end-stage renal disease who are under age 65 -RRB- . It 's made up of 4 parts : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A - this is your hospital insurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B - this is your physician insurance 3 -RRB- Medicare Part C - also known as Medicare Advantage . This coverage is sold by private insurance companies and provides benefits equal to or greater than those provided by Medicare Part A and Part B . Some carriers offer prescription drug coverage with a Medicare Advantage plan 4 -RRB- Medicare Part D - this is your stand-alone prescription drug plan . This is also sold by private insurance companies and can be used with Medicare Parts A & B . Many individuals add a Medicare supplement plan to their Part A & B coverage to cover expenses Medicare does n't cover .
Medicare Benefits are started automatically the first day of the month you turn 65 if you are already getting benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . Youll get your red , white and blue Medicare card in the mail 3 months before your 65th birthday . If youre not getting Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board and youre close to 65 , youll need to sign up . You can contact Social Security 3 months before you turn 65 , the month of your 65 birthday and 3 months after the month you turn 65 . Generally you wont pay a premium for Part A ; Part B will be deducted out of your Social Security Benefits and is based on your income . If you are still covered by your employers insurance you can decline your Part B coverage and save yourself that cost and apply later when your employer coverage ends . Once you have Medicare there are 2 main ways to get your Medicare coverage , there is Original Medicare or Medicare Advantage Plans . To keep thing simple if you chose Original Medicare you must buy a Part D Prescription Drug Coverage and you may also want to purchase Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . One thing to remember is that all Medigap policys with the same letter are identical in coverage the only difference is the price they charge you so shop around with a broker that represents multiple companies . If you chose Medicare Advantage its very similar to employer insurance where you have to see doctors that accept the insurance and there are small co-pays . Most Advantage plans include Medicare prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- and have low and sometimes no monthly premiums .
end question
start question
annuities
Do Annuities Have Beneficiaries ?
That is a great question ! As annuities are an insurance product , there is the ability to structure your annuity to allow the remaining balance to pass to a beneficiary . Depending upon how you structure it , you can have your annuity pay for a certain number of years and run out ; pay until you pass , then continue to pay your spouse ; or pay the remainder to a beneficiary when you and your spouse have passed . That amount can be structured as a lump sum , -LRB- taxes ! -RRB- or a series of payments -LRB- lesser chunk of taxes -RRB- . Ask your agent to walk you through the options , ok ? Thanks for asking !
You can name primary beneficiaries for your annuities . You can also name contingent beneficiaries as back ups to your primary beneficiaries . A beneficiary can even be a charitable organization or a trust . The annuity policy owner can also change the beneficiaries at his or her discretion at any time .
An annuity is the product of a life insurance company . Naming a beneficiary is an important feature of an annuity . It is a contract and is executed outside of probate . Naming a beneficiary is an important part of the application . Selecting a contingent beneficiary is very important to avoid a situation where the proceeds of the annuity would be paid into the estate and therefore subject to probate .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Yes , annuities can have beneficiaries , and most do . They are similar to the beneficiaries on a life insurance policy in that the value of the annuity goes to the beneficiary without passing through probate . If the annuity has already been annuitized , the remaining annuity payments will be made to the beneficiary . Life income annuities payments do end with the death of the annuitant , unless they are life income with term certain , or provide a cash refund if the amount put in to the annuity has not yet been paid out .
Yes , an annuity usually has a beneficiary . Generally , if the policy has not yet been annuitized and the annuity owner -LRB- s -RRB- is deceased , the beneficiary will receive the annuity and can choose to keep it , cash it in , or annuitize it . There may also be a death benefit that is paid to the beneficiary at this time . If annuity payments have already been started being paid , then the beneficiary can continue receiving those . If the annuity was a life income annuity there might not be any payments made to the beneficiary unless some guarantees were built into the contract .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
If the Annuity is owned by an individual and has an individual listed as the Beneficiary ; then it avoids probate and passes directly to the listed Beneficiary free of probate . But it is important to keep the Beneficiary for your Annuity updated on the contract . A Will does not override the Beneficiary designation on an Annuity contract . So make sure to review your Beneficiary designation upon any major life changes . Also , if the Beneficiary is not able to be found within a reasonable amount of time -LRB- or if they are deceased -RRB- , it can be reverted back to your Estate , thus being subject to Probate . This is why it is important to list a Contingent Beneficiary on your contract . You should also inform the Beneficiary that you listed them and give them contact info for the company .
Annuities MAY pay out to a beneficiary under certain circumstances , but they do not have a `` death benefit '' in the sense that life insurance does . While life insurance is designed to pay a guaranteed benefit to the beneficiary upon the death of the insured , an annuity - fixed or variable - only pay what is remaining according to the structure of the annuity to the beneficiary upon the death of the annuitant . So if the annuity is designated `` Life Certain '' , payments end at the death of the annuitant and there is no beneficiary . If the annuity is designed as a `` Period Certain '' and the annuitant dies before the `` Period '' ends then the beneficiary will receive the remaining payments up to the end of the ` period ' .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Annuities are contracts . The contract normally names a beneficiary and often a contingent beneficiary should the beneficiary die first . The value of the annuity would be transferred to the beneficiary and the company would issue a 1099 for any taxable distribution . Depending upon the annuity it might have the option for the beneficiary to continue the annuity for their own benefit .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
Good question ! Creditor protection is an important concern , especially for the self-employed . There are basically two types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Both are considered insurance products and as such can offer creditor protection under certain circumstances . Immediate annuities , as the name suggests , provide an immediate income stream in exchange for a lump sum . They are often used to provide a guaranteed income in retirement planning . Deferred annuities are accumulation products that have the option of an annuity at some point in the future . In Canada for example , they can be Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- , that are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GIC -RRB- or Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- that are similar to mutual funds . With both types of annuities , in order to offer creditor protection , you would need to have been solvent when you put the money into the contracts . In other words , you would not have been trying to attempt fraud . If the above condition is met , the income flow from immediate annuities is afforded creditor protection . Deferred annuities , like insurance policies , receive creditor protection based on the beneficiary designation . Eligible beneficiaries include those in the `` protected class '' : spouse , parents , children and grandchildren . In addition , irrevocable beneficiaries also qualify . Please check with a lawyer for your individual situation . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
New York and some other states are known as `` divorce revocation states . '' There is a provision in the N.Y. Estates Powers and Trusts code that automatically revokes an ex-spouse as beneficiary of a life insurance policy . Under certain circumstances this little known provision can wreak havoc on the lives of a surviving parent and children when an ex-spouse dies . The law states that your spouse is automatically revoked as beneficiary of any life insurance policy as soon as you are divorced , even if you do n't want them to be . There is a way this can be addressed , but it requires that the policyholder take action . Let 's assume your husband has a $ 500,000 life insurance policy and you are the beneficiary . You are getting divorced and you both agree that you will work together on any issues involving your children . Your marriage is bad , but you still work together as parents . Your husband says that he will leave you as beneficiary of his life insurance policy until the kids are self supporting . If he just `` leaves '' you as the beneficiary , you will no longer be the beneficiary as soon as you divorce . The state of New York has determined that by the act of the divorce itself you are no longer legally his beneficiary . If he dies without having taken any action , the contingent beneficiary will get the proceeds , not you . In order to fix this , your now ex-husband needs to complete a beneficiary change form and make you the beneficiary again , this time listing your relationship as `` ex-spouse . '' It 's a small technicality but not addressing it could be financially catastrophic . By naming you as his beneficiary and ex-spouse after the divorce , you are now legally the beneficiary again . I saw one case where the wife `` took over '' her ex-husbands life insurance policy to make sure the policy stayed in effect and she remained the beneficiary . She had been paying the premium for many years when her ex-husband passed away . When she filed the death claim she was told that because the beneficiary designation predated the divorce she had been revoked as beneficiary . The benefit was paid to someone else . If you are divorced and you or your ex-spouse 's life insurance predates the divorce , it 's critical that you find out if yours is a divorce revocation state . If it is , update your beneficiaries . I apologize for the very long post , but there are many women -LRB- and men too ! -RRB- that need to be aware of this .
Let me begin by saying that I do not sell annuities -LRB- I do not have my series six license -RRB- and I am not a licensed attorney . However , prior to becoming an agent I went to law school and clerked in an probate/estate firm for two years . Annuities can pass outside probate so long as you name a beneficiary -LRB- just like life insurance -RRB- . Typically , a spouse is named as the primary beneficiary and children as a contingent beneficiary . Many people currently use a Revocable Living Trust to avoid probate , and the trust can also be named as a contingent beneficiary . If no beneficiary is named , however , your annuity will have to pass through probate . And , depending upon its value the inventory fees could be quite expensive . I hope this helps answer your question .
This is a very interesting question because life insurance carriers allow for a lot of flexibility in beneficiary designations . For example , you have the primary beneficiary . This person -LRB- or entity , such as a corporation or trust -RRB- will get the money when the insured dies . What if I unfortunately the primary beneficiary is not alive -LRB- or in business -RRB- when the insured dies ? That is why you can designate a contingent beneficiary . This beneficiary will get the money in those exact circumstances - when the primary beneficiary is not available . What if you wanted to name multiple primary or contingent beneficiaries ? That can be done . Do they have to get equal shares ? No . As a matter of fact , especially when the contingent beneficiary is children , parents often do not apportion the benefit equally . What if you want to set up successor beneficiaries along bloodlines ? Such as your child , but if your child is not available , then your childs child ? This can also be done . Make sure you discuss this with your estate planning attorney . What if you want to make the beneficiaries minors ? Not a good idea . An insurance company will not release money to a minor . You will need to do some estate planning to secure that money .
This depends on what is happening with the annuity when someone dies and what type of annuity -LRB- owner or annuitant driven -RRB- we 're talking about . For an annuity that is not paying income and the owner is the annuitant -LRB- i.e. the type of contract wo n't matter -RRB- , the cash value of the annuity will be paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- in the contract . If the annuity have been annuitized -LRB- i.e. is paying an income stream -RRB- the chosen option will determine what happens . For life only annuity payments , the payments will stop and no further money will be paid out . For period certain annuities , the income will continue until the period certain has ended . For life with a refund -LRB- installment or lump sum cash -RRB- than the refund will pay the the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- until the cash value of the annuity has been paid out in full to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- .
What happens to an annuity upon death depends on the type of annuity you have and the contractual stipulations . If you have an annuity that was set up to pay out for the rest of your life , there may be not benefit paid upon your death . Some Life Annuities will return what was paid in or pay for a guaranteed number of years . A Joint with Last Survivor Annuity will continue payments to the spouse . For annuities that will are set up to pay a fixed number of years , annuity payments will continue to the beneficiaries just as if they did before . If the annuity was not yet annuitized , the proceeds must be received by the beneficiaries within 5 years . Contact your agent or the company through which your annuity was secured to understand the specifics about your particular contract .
This depends on the type of Annuity . Most all Annuities have a Beneficiary Designation which names an individual that you wish the proceeds to pass to . They will pass to the Beneficiary free of probate . A Deferred Annuity will always have a named beneficiary . An Immediate Annuity sometimes might not . But most immediate Annuities have Death Benefit Options that allow for the funds -LRB- or part of them -RRB- to pass to an individual .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Is Required For Renters Insurance ?
To secure renters insurance coverage you will need to know the amount of coverage -LRB- the valuation of all of your personal items -RRB- that you desire , the year the building your premise is in was built , the number of units in the building , distance of the nearest responding fire department , distance to the nearest fire hydrant , and whether or not there is a sprinkler system and/or security system in the building just to name the main items . Contact a local agent and they can assist you in getting a quote for coverage within your local area .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
If it is included in your renters contract , renters insurance can be required . This is actually a very smart thing , both for the renter and for the landlord . The renters insurance will protect your property in case of fire or theft , and it helps protect the landlord in case of a liability claim . Also , landlord insurance is generally cheaper if renters insurance is required .
The entity that is renting the property to the ` renter or renters ' is typically the homeowner policyholder . It could be an organization , corporation or individual who holds the homeowner policy . The owner of the residence pays for their own policy . They are the ` landlord ' in common terms . The renter may be required by the owner , to carry a renter 's insurance policy but the two policies are different . Even if the renter is not required to have a renter 's policy , it is a wise move to purchase one , as the premiums are usually relatively low and the coverages are fairly extensive , primarily for losses and damages to personal property and also for liability coverage for accidental injury to others .
Renter 's Insurance is not required by state law , but many landlords will require that you carry renter 's insurance as part of your lease agreement . This is because Renter 's Insurance comes with liability insurance protection , so , in some cases , if you damage the premises , they can collect from your Renter 's Insurance policy . That coverage usually applies for accidentally created fires -LRB- for example -RRB- . Fortunately , most people can buy Renter 's insurance for about $ 10 - $ 12 per month -LRB- it might be less and some basic policies only cost about $ 5.00 / month -RRB- . Send me an email and I can get you a rate !
You may be required to purchase Renters Insurance . It depends if this is a requirement in your rental agreement or lease agreement . Some properties do require renters insurance to cover their interest . Renters Insurance also covers general liability and most leasing agency 's require a minimum of $ 100,000 in liability insurance . They do not care how much personal property you insure as long as the liability insurance is there . These policy 's can be very inexpensive especially for example if you buy the minimum policy $ 5.000 in personal property is usually the lowest you can buy , and $ 100,000 in liability for around $ 10.00 per month
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
Unlike what you see on television , insurance doesnt come in packages on the shelves of a store . Each renter is individually underwritten to meet the specific requirements of that renter . The average renter in my agency pays around $ 10 month for renters insurance . The company reports a slightly higher figure but neither figure bears any resemblance to what your premium might be .
When renting a home , the home owner needs to have Landlords Insurance to provide coverage for the Dwelling and Premises Liability . The renter needs to buy Renters Insurance to provide coverage for Personal Property & Family Liability . Although both the Landlords policy and the Renters policy are not required by law , it is advisable to be covered in the event of a claim . Many large property management companies and property owners do require tenants to purchase Renters Insurance as a condition to the Rental Agreement ; the reason for this is to avoid lengthy and cumbersome legal issues in the event of a claim attributable to negligence . For a small premium the Renters Insurance provides the tenant with Family Liability coverage which will offer defense and payout damages up to the policy limit . Liability coverage will offer protection for negligence that may lead to a claim -LRB- i.e. accidental fire , smoke , water damage etc. . . -RRB-
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is Employer Sponsored Retirement Plan ?
Employer Sponsored Retirement Plan is generally an ERISA qualified plan that a business sponsors for their employees with employee tax deductible contributions and sometimes an employer contribution match . An example of such a plan is the popular 401k retirement plan offered by many corporations and small businesses alike .
Employers are always searching for quality employees from the labor force . Offering employer sponsored qualified retirement plans can be a significant recruiting and retention feature of the company . A popular choice of employer sponsored retirement plans are defined contribution retirement plans . Some employers match a percentage of the employee 's contribution to enhance the retirement benefit .
There are employer sponsored retirement plans as well as individual retirement plans . One example of an employer sponsored retirement plan under ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 -RRB- is a defined contribution plan , where pretax contributions accumulate tax deferred and some employers match a portion of the contribution . Individuals can set up their own IRAs .
First create a financial profile that includes your timeline to retirement , your life expectancy , your tax bracket and your risk tolerance . Estimating timelines will help you frame your retirement planning . Knowing your tax bracket will help you decide whether to use a qualified or non qualified retirement plan . Determining your risk tolerance will also help your select the right investment product . You need to discover if your employer sponsors a retirement plan , especially if it offers matching contributions . This can help you decide whether to use an individual or employer sponsored retirement plan .
Choosing the retirement plan for yourself can be a daunting task , but here are a few factors that may assist you in your decision . First should you use a qualified or no qualified plans?Second , should you use your employer sponsored or individual retirement plan?If you are ina high tax bracket and your employer offers matching contributions , you should select a qualified employer sponsored retirement plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- .
Choosing the retirement plan for yourself can be a daunting task , but here are a few factors that may assist you in your decision . First should you use a qualified or no qualified plans?Second , should you use your employer sponsored or individual retirement plan?If you are ina high tax bracket and your employer offers matching contributions , you should select a qualified employer sponsored retirement plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . But if your tax bracket is minimal and you like more flexibility that a regulated qualified plan , a non qualified plan using indexed life insurance may be appropriate for you . These are just a couple of considerations to get you started .
A good question ! Portability in insurance is similar to portability regarding anything else . For example a portable radio is one that you can take with you to the beach or a friends house . The question of portability regarding insurance usually comes up when discussing employer sponsored insurance . In many if not most cases insurance that is purchased through an employer sponsored group plan is NOT portable . That is if you leave the company your insurance terminates . Some products such as Aflac supplemental health insurance ARE portable even when purchased through your employer on a payroll deduction . There are some employer sponsored life insurance plans that are portable , so you should ask your employer or the HR department what yours is .
An employer sponsored qualified retirement plan under ERISA , the Employee Retirement Income security Act of 1974 , is generally the largest sponsor of retirement plans . These types of retirement plans can be a defined benefit plan , but in today 's market , it is more likely a defined contribution plan using pretax dollars .
Non-qualified tax deferred annuities can be individually owned , jointly owned and owned by a qualified individual retirement account or employer sponsored qualified retirement account . In the case of a qualified individual retirement account or employer sponsored qualified retirement account , the ownership is individual , but for annuitization purposes can be joint annuitants .
Employer Sponsored Retirement Plan is generally an ERISA qualified plan that a business sponsors for their employees with employee tax deductible contributions and sometimes an employer contribution match . An example of such a plan is the popular 401k retirement plan offered by many corporations and small businesses alike .
Generally an employer sponsored qualified retirement plan under ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 . -RRB- can be a defined benefit or contribution plan . Most employer sponsored plans today are defined contributions plans like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- that permits pretax contributions , tax deferral accumulations and distributions taxed as ordinary income .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
what is a defined benefit plan ? A defined benefit plan is an employer sponsored retirement plan that the employer bares all the risk of investment . A defined benefit plan provides an outcome for employees rather than a lump sum balancesubject to market risks.A defined benefit plan used to be the norm for retirement programs , now they arerare asmany employers have jumped to 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans which only obligate the employer to the original contribution . The shift of RISK falls completely on the employee .
Planning for retirement is planning for your lifestyle in your golden years ; you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your effective tax bracket and a life expectancy report so you can create a reasonable timeline . If youre younger than age 45 , you should consider retirement at age 70 because your life expectancy may be 20 to 25 years more if youre a nonsmoker and in good health . You need to determine if your employer sponsors a defined contribution plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , especially if the employer offers a contribution match . If your employer doesnt offer such a plan , you may want to consider a Roth IRA or Traditional IRA . If youre self-employed and you make six figure income , you may want to investigate SEPs . Some retirement plans are non-qualified using annuities and/or life insurance to fund their retirement . Once you perform your personal financial profile , you can begin the review process to determine how youll fund your retirement .
This is a tough question . How old are you ? What is your health ? And why are you taking the money out ? If you are older than 591/2 , you can request a distribution form from your plan sponsor or employer . The form will ask whether you want to take a single distribution or a series of systematic payments . If it is not going into a Rollover IRA , the sponsor usually withholds the taxes on your behalf and you would get the net amount paid to you either in a check or an EFT . If you are YOUNGER than 591/2 , there is a 10 % excise tax that is charged -LRB- premature withdrawal -RRB- by the IRS . So if you can , try and avoid withdrawing funds prior to your retirement and do a LOAN instead . That way you are paying yourself the interest on the loaned portion of the 401K funds , and not a bank . Depending on your plan , you may also be able to take out what they call `` in service '' distributions . These allow you to transfer your funds into IRA accounts and diversify your investments for retirement . And thanks to a recent IRS change , you can even move funds from your Retirement and create a guaranteed income stream -LRB- provided by the carrier that you purchase the product from -RRB- through a Deferred Income Annuity . Think of this like buying a defined benefit with your retirement assets that you can never outlive . I hope that this answers your question .
Generally speaking , a qualified retirement plan is one legislated by the government with tax advantaged features to attract American workers to save for retirement . One example is The Employee Retirement Income Security act of 1974 -LRB- ERISA -RRB- that addresses defined benefit and defined contribution plans . And one of the most popular employer sponsored defined contribution retirement plans is a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . Plan participants can make pretax contributions that accumulate tax deferred and some employers match a portion of the employee 's contribution . Of course distributions at retirement are taxed as ordinary income and there are penalties for distributions before age 591/2 .
You know , it sounds a little out of place , but there are reasons for why people lose their life insurance . Do any of these apply to you ? 1 . They didnt pay their premiums . 2 . They were covered under an employer-sponsored plan , and the employer stopped sponsoring that plan . 3 . They were covered under an association plan , and either the association stopped sponsoring the plan , or the carrier dropped the association .
You need to determine if your employer sponsors a qualified plan , If your employer sponsors a defined contribution plan like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and matches some portion of your contribution , you should participate in the plan . But if you need to start your own plan , consider an IRA or Roth IRA for tax deductible contributions . But perhaps the biggest issue is first creating a personal financial profile that includes a risk assessment analysis to assist you in selecting a product line to fund your plan . Keep in mind that your retirement date and your life expectancy are critical time line considerations as well .
Employer sponsored Disability Insurance is Disability Insurance that is provided to employees by the employer or business they work for , and governed by ERISA -LRB- the Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- . Employer sponsored disability insurance can be short term , long term , or a combination of short and long term disability coverage .
When changing jobs , deciding how to address your health insurance needs in the gap period between employer sponsored health insurance plans is both simpler and more complicated than ever before . The size of the employer group you are leaving will impact on your planning as well . If your employer has less than 20 employees then state continuation of coverage provisions will apply , these vary from state to state but they are usually for shorter periods of time than the Federal COBRA law requires . Employers with 20 + employees are subject to the Federal COBRA guidelines where most employees can continue their coverage for up to 18-months . Your continuation of coverage options to consider now in 2014 are ; 1 -RRB- Continuation of Coverage through Your Existing Employer 's Health Plan - you will need to notify your former employer of your intention to continue your coverage under their group plan within 63-days of your last day of employment . You must make premium payments in full and remit them in a timely manner to your former employer -LRB- or their administrator -RRB- each month to keep your coverage in effect . 2 -RRB- Short Term Medical Insurance - if you are healthy and pre-existing condition issues are not a personal concern and if you are confident that you will be obtaining new employment with benefits in the next several weeks to months then Short Term Major Medical Insurance may be an alternative to consider . Just because you can continue with your former employer 's coverage does not mean you are required to or that you will find it affordable . Short Term Medical plans are often far less expensive than group health insurance plans and in some cases may even offer you more coverage than your employer 's plan . A note of caution : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the minimum coverage requirements under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- so a person covered by such a policy may find themselves subject to the individual mandate tax penalty for the period of the year they are insured under such plans . 3 -RRB- Obtain Individual Major Medical Insurance - maybe your prospects for being quickly hired somewhere else are not strong at this time or perhaps you are considering taking a new career path -LRB- e.g - consultant , freelancer , contractor -RRB- , having health insurance independent of your employer may be the best solution . In this event you will want to explore your health insurance plan options both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplaces and whether you would qualify for any premium tax subsidies . 4 -RRB- Qualification for Medicaid/CHIP , etc. - depending upon your income level and/or other life circumstances you may have to explore your coverage options under various state and/or Federal health benefit plans for you and/or your dependents . 5 -RRB- Go Without Coverage - not my recommendation but it is an option and an option than no small number of people choose each year . Considering the potential financial risk of an uninsured illness or injury this is really only an option of last resort and a person faced with such a situation should pursue their government coverage options if possible . That should pretty well cover all the possible ways to address your coverage needs between jobs .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can Health Insurance Premiums Be Claimed On Taxes ?
Health insurance premiums may be able to be deducted on your taxes , although the schedule you file and the type of benefits you receive will be a factor . Whether you itemize , are self-employed or file as a corporation will all impact the destructibility . A CPA or a tax-professional -LRB- and perhaps Turbo Tax -RRB- will be a great resource .
The health insurance premium tax credit is a creation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and first became available January 1 , 2014 . In general , individuals and families whose income falls between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level will qualify for some level of subsidy for health insurance that they purchase through the Federal or state health insurance marketplaces in the person 's state of residence . The amount of premium credit a person qualifies for is based upon a sliding scale that is highest at the low end of the Federal Poverty Level and declines to almost nothing as a person gets to the 400 % level . A person can only receive this premium tax credit for health insurance plans they purchase through the government health insurance marketplace . You do have a choice when you learn that you qualify for a premium tax credit . You can choose to receive it in the form of an `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' or you can wait until you do your annual taxes and capture it at that time . With the `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' choice your credit amount will be sent to the insurance carrier you select each month to pay a portion of your monthly premium and you will be balance billed for the rest . If you opt to pay for your health insurance in full and then claim your credit on your income taxes the amount of the credit you qualified for would be included in any income tax refund you receive . This might be a very important choice . Your premium subsidy will be based upon what you estimate your income will be in the coming year . If you guess wrong and receive a higher subsidy than it turns out you actually qualified for based on the income you report on your income tax form for that year then the overpayment can be withheld from any income tax refund you might have had coming . Conversely , if you made less than you had projected you would find your possible income tax refund increased by the remaining subsidy amount you would have qualified for . While the premium tax subsidies do provide a mechanism to assist persons in certain income levels to purchase health insurance they might not have otherwise been able to afford , it will also complicate the income tax filing process for many of these people .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Medicare Part A is typically $ 0 as long as you met your 40 quarters -LRB- or 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes -LRB- Medicare taxes -RRB- . If you have not met that requirement , the monthly premium is up to $ 426 per month . For 2014 , the premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 . This can change each year and is based on your modified adjusted gross income on your tax return from 2 years prior . You may also face a high-income premium penalty on your Part B coverage . The $ 104.90 premium is for those with incomes of $ 85,000 or less , if filing an individual tax return , and $ 170,000 , if filing a joint tax return . If your income was between $ 85,000 and $ 107,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 170,000 and $ 214,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 146.90 . If your income was between $ 107,000 and $ 160,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 214,000 and $ 320,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 209.80 . If your income was between $ 160,000 and $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 320,000 and $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 272.70 . If your income was above $ 214,000 -LRB- for individual tax returns -RRB- , $ 428,000 for those married filing joint tax returns , your premium would be $ 335.70 . You can encounter other expenses as well such as the Part A and Part B deductibles and late enrollment penalties for not enrolling in Part B when you were first eligible for Medicare . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of healthcare expenses . You 're generally responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan can greatly help establish a predictable expense structure - essential for individuals on a fixed income in retirement . It will limit the amount of cost you 're susceptible to in the event of an illness or injury .
Many employees have been surprised and concerned to see the value of their employer provided health insurance being reported on their W2 's . This is a requirement of the Affordable Care Act . Under transitional relief guidelines issued , so far only employers who issue 250 or more W2 forms in a calendar year are required to report this information . Eventually all employers who provide health insurance to their employees will be required to report this information on the employee 's W2 . This reporting of the employer paid amount for health insurance is for `` informational '' purposes only and is not being added to the employee 's gross income for income tax purposes . There are some skeptics who see this as a precursor to the eventual tax treatment of employer paid health insurance as employee income at some future date but at this time there is nothing in the Affordable Care Act or any pending legislation that would do this . Where this reporting of employer paid health insurance will become a tax issue will be in 2018 when the `` Cadillac Tax '' portion of the health care law goes into effect . The Cadillac Tax will be a 40 % excise tax imposed on health insurance plans whose annual premium costs exceed $ 10,200 for an individual or $ 27,500 for family coverage -LRB- these amounts will be indexed for inflation -RRB- . So , an employer in 2018 who finds themselves with health plan premium levels exceeding these amounts will be assessed a 40 % tax penalty . While such annual premium amounts may seem unreachable by many persons in 2014 . In some areas of the country , and especially with some very rich collectively bargained plans , total costs are already coming close to these trigger points . When one observes the increases in group health insurance plan costs already triggered by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act in 2014 and applies projected inflationary trend increases over the next few years it becomes much easier to estimate that a larger portion of employer based plans could find themselves subject to this tax penalty . This is one of the underlying motivations for more employers to move to high deductible health insurance plans in order to reduce their premium costs .
Could be . Since I am not a certified accountant , I can not give tax advice but here are the parameters for possible tax-advantaged treatment to discuss with a tax professional : 1 . Every year the IRS publishes the formula of percentage of premium by age that can be used for favorable tax treatment on the 1040 tax return . This formula is updated on various tax preparation software programs every year and certainly qualified tax advisors know what it is . It is also public information that can be obtained at various websites .2 . If the premium causes one to exceed the minimum percentage of health care costs on Schedule A , that amount above the minimum percentage could be deductible .3 . If one is a business owner , the above mention formula may be used on Schedule C to determine the deduction allowable as an amount paid for health insurance premiums .4 . C-corps may be able to ignore the IRS formula and deduct 100 % of the long-term care insurance premium on Schedule C.There may be other situations in which the payment of LTCi premium is treated in a tax-favorable manner . This is a topic for discussion with a qualified tax advisor before a consumer should make any assumptions about the tax treatment of the payment of long-term care insurance premiums .
The long and short is answer is yes and no . If it were only that easy . There are several factors that play into premium increases due to claims . The first is the insurance company policies and underwriting . Also , what type of business are you in . Followed by the two biggest factors in premium changes due to claims , which are frequency and severity . The frequency is the number of claims that you have and how often they occur . Also are your claims predictable or are they unforeseen . Severity refers to the size or dollar amount of the claim . All of these factors and more will go into the decision to change your premium . If it is a claim that can happen again and there are no risk management procedures in place at your business , that is not in your favor . If you have a rather large claim that exceeds your premium that is also not in your favor . If you shop insurance companies every year and have no loyalty to the carrier , that is not in you r favor . If you are late paying your premium or have minimum coverage limits that can also be viewed negatively . Conversely , if you do the opposite of the above mentioned , then a single claim maybe considered a rare occurrence and not worthy of effecting your premium the following year . The best thing to do is get with your agent and discuss all the facets of the claim and what best course of action to take .
You 've touched on one of the inequities of our system , the essentially unequal tax treatment of individual versus group health insurance . Group health insurance plans are tax advantaged in two ways ; 1 -RRB- what the employer pays towards coverage is a deductible business expense , and 2 -RRB- the employee 's share of their insurance premium costs can be deducted from their paychecks on a pretax basis and reducing their net cost of buying health insurance . Neither of these tax advantages apply to individual health insurance coverage a person might purchase for themselves . Though , as of January 1 , 2014 , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act , person 's purchasing individual health insurance through the government marketplaces may qualify for an advanced premium tax subsidy depending upon their income level . So , in simple terms , in the group health insurance world you may be able to pay for your portion of your health insurance on a pre-tax basis but in the individual health insurance world you are generally in a post-tax payment environment -LRB- I 'm not going to stray into how some small business owners structure their business expenses and taxes as it regards these matters -RRB- .
With the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- that became effective January 1 , 2014 , the differences in what group and individual health insurance cover are virtually nonexistent . The removal of underwriting , pre-existing condition exclusions and/or limitations and the addition of guaranteed issue and maternity coverage to both policy types has furthered leveled the playing field between group health and individual health insurance products . The crucial advantage group health plans continue to enjoy versus their individual market counterparts are tax issue related . What an employer contributes towards the health insurance coverage of their employees is a deductible business expense and in some small group cases may even qualify for a tax credit . In addition , employees can pay for their share of group health premiums using pre-tax dollars under a Section 125 Plan . Pre-tax treatment of employee contributions not only saves employee 's money , it reduces net taxable payroll which in turn lowers employer FICA matching expenses which is a further tax savings . For most individuals who purchase and pay for individual health insurance on their own there are none of these associated tax benefits . That is not to say that some individuals can not structure their business affairs to get some tax advantages in the individual marketplace but , after the ACA , our system is now set up to continue to tax favor group policies versus individual policies and to tax favor individual health insurance policies via subsidies up to certain income levels up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
You can not claim disability premiums as a write off on your taxes as an individual . However , if you own a company and are providing disability insurance for your employees then yes you can write off your disability premiums . There is an advantage to owning disability insurance . Since you are paying the premiums , if you have a disability claim then all the proceeds or income from that plan are tax free to you . Whereas if your employer pays your premiums and he claimed them on his taxes , your disability proceeds would be taxed as income .
The announced intention of Obamacare was to get everyone who was not already insured through an individual , group or government health program to enroll in health insurance coverage . Will you be jailed for not having health insurance ? No . You will , however , be subject to a tax -LRB- as the Supreme Court defined it -RRB- / penalty -LRB- as the administration prefers to refer to it -RRB- for not having health insurance coverage that meets the requirements of the law . In practical terms the tax penalty is minimal -LRB- $ 95 or 1 % of modified adjusted gross income in the first year -RRB- and there are now a number of loosely defined `` hardship '' exemptions that a person can claim to avoid the penalty . Plus , the IRS can only withhold the tax penalty from an income tax refund , it can not be charged as an additional tax per se and you ca n't have your bank account or wages garnisheed by the IRS to collect the tax penalty . This begs the question as to just how effective a mechanism the tax penalty will be in motivating people to purchase health insurance . Certainly , based upon the preliminary results of the recently closed open enrollment period it does not appear to have been a major factor in significantly reducing the number of uninsured Americans . If you have further questions or require health insurance advice and assistance please click on the `` contact me '' button and I will be happy to help .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
When you need to file a Homeowners Insurance Claim , the best and quickest way to handle it is to call the CLAIMS Telephone number listed on your Homeowners Insurance declarations page . Most carriers have a 24 Hour reporting line for claims ; the station is staffed by an individual trained to take an initial report and pass it on to the assigned claims adjustor based on the type of claim and geographical location of the loss . Once the preliminary report is taken , a claims number is assigned , an adjustor is assigned and the preliminary record is report to the National Database also known as CLUE ; CLUE is a tool used industry wide to review prior claims activity on homes . The CLUE report will later be updated eventual showing the Closed Status and total amount paid by the insurance carrier to resolve the claim . When making the initial claim report , it is beneficial to only offer a simple and general explanation of the nature of the loss ; it is always better to give all the details directly to the claims adjustor as the initial claims report is usually not taken by a person licensed and trained with the capabilities of the insurance adjustor.In most cases , the insurance carrier will assign and adjustor who will make an initial contact within 1 business day . The adjustor will make an appointment to come out and review the damages claimed , a detailed estimate of the required repairs will be prepared and the adjustor willinterpret the policy to determine if and to what extent coverage applies to the damage incurred ; the final process will be a resolution letter mailed to the insured with a full accounting of the situation and perhaps an associated check for repairs . In some cases , an initial payment may be offered holding back thedepreciated portion of the loss until thedamages or items are replaced after which the carrier will reimburse the insured for the full replacement cost of the items as long as the policy coverseverything on a replacement cost basis . Any specificquestions regarding a loss should be directly discussed with the claims adjustorwho is licensed and responsible to handle the complete transaction and explain the processto the insured . Prior to any claim occurrence , it may alsobe a good idea to contact a licensed insurance representative to learn the process and best recommended method of handling thesituation should youencounter a claim .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
No , not exempt as such . Whether you get your health insurance through an employer based plan or whether you are self-employed and purchase your own individual health insurance can have tax implications for you though . Generally , in today 's employer based insurance environment the employee is paying some portion of their individual and/or dependent health insurance premiums . And , in most such cases the employer is taking your share of the premium out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis under a Section 125 Plan . The employee is receiving a tax advantage in this context as their share of their premium is taken out of paycheck on a pre-tax basis thus reducing their taxable net income and reducing the amount they pay in taxes . For the self-employed this issue gets more complex and you should seek the advice of a CPA or tax attorney . Health insurance premiums a self-employed person can be deducted or expensed depending upon how your business is structured and what your individual situation is . As is always the case when we 're talking about taxes it 's more complicated than the very simplistic answer that I have given and that is why you should seek professional advice on this matter .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can Auto Insurance Be Deducted On Taxes ?
If you are using your auto for business and have your own business you can write a portion of the premium off if you have it on a personal auto policy . but if you have a business auto policy and use that car for business only then the entire premium can be written off .
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Life insurance in general is not tax deductible . However , in several instances it can be . The two most important taxes to considering a deduction is income tax & estate tax . Under income tax , life insurance is deductible inside a qualified retirement plan , like a pension or profit sharing . There are some other instances that it may be deductible for a company . In regards , to the estate tax , life insurance is not really deductible , but it can be taxed heavily if not set up correctly . The ownership of the life insurance policy determines if it is included in the estate & taxed or excluded from the estate and not taxed ! In all cases , base to seek competent advisors .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Yes , many long term care insurance premiums can be deducted on income tax as a medical expense . The plans must be qualified LTCI plans . The Long Term Care Federal Tax Deductible Limits for 2013 are itemized on IRS Revenue Procedure : 2012-41 . These limits are age based . Here are how some of the deductions work . 1 -RRB- Working for someone else : Only the portion of total medical expenses that exceeds your adjusted gross income by 7.5 % can be deducted , using Schedule A on your tax return . If your employer pays the full LTCI premium , your employer may deduct the total expense . 2 -RRB- Self employed : The entire premium of you , spouse and dependents -LRB- up to federal age based limits -RRB- can be deducted on line 29 of tax form 1040 . 3 -RRB- C Corporation : 100 % of premium is deductible for employee , spouse and dependents with no age based limits on premium . 4 -RRB- State income tax deductions and/or credits 5 -RRB- Paying premium with HSA .
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
Your deductible for your auto insurance is typically selected by you . The deductible amount can affect your auto insurance premiums greatly . The higher the deductible amount typically the lessor your premium . If you currently have your auto insurance coverage through a high risk carrier they may require higher deductibles .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Normally , you can not deduct auto insurance from your taxes . If you are self-employed or own a business , a car used for that business can have expenses deducted with certain limitations . To fully deduct insurance and other expenses on a vehicle , it must be used 100 % for business purposes . If it is used for both personal and business , it becomes more complicated . With the simplest way , a flat amount per mile can be deducted for all business usage . The second way is to keep track of ALL expenses associated with the vehicle including gas , repairs , and insurance , as well as exact records about miles for business and personal use . The percentage of total miles used for business is the percentage of total expenses that can be deducted . Caution should always be used taking business deductions such as vehicle expenses and home office expenses as the rules are very strict and those types of deductions can increase the likelihood of an audit .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Typically , you can not claim your home owner 's insurance on your primary residence as a deduction on your taxes . If you own , rental homes , then you could deduct the premiums as a tax deduction . A good rule of thumb for insurance used for personal benefit -LRB- not a business use -RRB- ... if you can deduct the premiums on your taxes , the benefits are likely to be taxed . Disability is probably the best illustration ... if the premiums are taken out pre-tax , then the benefit is taxed . Life insurance inside a pension plan is another example ... the death benefit is taxed as income !
Could be . Since I am not a certified accountant , I can not give tax advice but here are the parameters for possible tax-advantaged treatment to discuss with a tax professional : 1 . Every year the IRS publishes the formula of percentage of premium by age that can be used for favorable tax treatment on the 1040 tax return . This formula is updated on various tax preparation software programs every year and certainly qualified tax advisors know what it is . It is also public information that can be obtained at various websites .2 . If the premium causes one to exceed the minimum percentage of health care costs on Schedule A , that amount above the minimum percentage could be deductible .3 . If one is a business owner , the above mention formula may be used on Schedule C to determine the deduction allowable as an amount paid for health insurance premiums .4 . C-corps may be able to ignore the IRS formula and deduct 100 % of the long-term care insurance premium on Schedule C.There may be other situations in which the payment of LTCi premium is treated in a tax-favorable manner . This is a topic for discussion with a qualified tax advisor before a consumer should make any assumptions about the tax treatment of the payment of long-term care insurance premiums .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Who Is Automatically Enrolled In Medicare ?
Those who have worked in the Social Security system at least 10 years , are a US citizen or legal resident and have lived in the US at least 5 years are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B at age 65 If you are the spouse of someone who is qualified for Medicare , meet residency requirements and have been married at least a year , you are enrolled as well at age 65
You will enrolled for Medicare Part A automatically when you turn 65 . If you are receiving Social Securiy you will be enrolled in Part B automatically and Social Security will start deducting your Part B premium from your monthly Social Security Benefit . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits Medicare will notify you 4 to 6 months prior to your Medicare open enrollment period that you are eligible for Medicare the first day of your birth month on your 65th birthday . Your Open Enrollment Period is a 7-month period beginning 3-months before your 65th birthday and 3-months after . You can reply to the Medicare enrollment reminder to enroll you in Medicare or you can decline Part B . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits you will have to pay the first 3-months of your Part B premium by check or money order . You can decline Part B without penalty as long as you are enrolled in an qualified employer health care plan . If you are not enrolled in such a plan you will be penalized 10 % each year when or if you apply for Part B . You can also use the Medicare.gov website to enroll online .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Individuals who reside in the United States and Puerto Rico who are eligible for premium free Medicare Part A are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part B . You can notify Medicare to not enroll if you choose . Medicare Part B is voluntary and has a premium . There is also and penalty associated with not enrolling when you are eligible without creditible coverage . A person who is not eligble for premium free Part A but is a citizen of the United States or a legal Permanent Resident that has lived in the United States for the previous 5 continuousyears is also eligible for Medicare Part B .
Medicare Part A is automatic once you turn age 65 . Medicare Part B is also an automatic enrollment unless you opt out or choose to delay your coverage . Beyond that your choice is to keep traditional Medicare -LRB- Part A and Part B -RRB- and purchase a Medicare supplement plan , or enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan . Advantage plans are a form of privatized Medicare that is managed by insurance carriers .
As explained above , when you turn 65 you are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A . As long as you are a citizen , or a legal resident and have worked 40 quarters in the United States , this benefit will be free . If you have worked less than the 40 quarters , you may be able to buy the Part A benefit . In addition , if you are under 65 and disabled you may also be eligible for Medicare coverage . Part B of Medicare is optional unlike Part A . If you are enrolled in Part A and have insurance through your employer , you may not have to enroll in Part B , which costs $ 104.90 per month . However , if you want to benefit from full Medicare coverage , you will need Part B as well as Part A . In addition , if you would like to enroll in supplementary insurance in addition to Medicare -LRB- Medigap , Medicare Advantage orPart DRx coverage -RRB- , you must be enrolled in both Part A and Part B.
You are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part B at the same time that you are enrolled in Medicare Part A if you are receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you are under age 65 and have been disabled for two years , or you have ALS . If you do n't want Part B at that time , you can send in a card indicating that you do not want Part B. To sign up for it later on you should enroll during a special enrollment period to save money . Call Social Security at 1-800-772-1213 to find out if you are eligible for a special enrollment period . If not , you will need to wait until the general enrollment period Jan1 to Mar 31 , 2014 .
Most people will automatically be enrolled in Medicare Part B at the same time they are enrolled in Medicare Part A . They will receive their Medicare card in the mail three months before their 65th birthday or in the 25th month of their disability . If you or your spouse is working at a job with over 20 employees where the group health insurance provided is your primary carrier , you may delay enrolling in Part B. Call the Social Security Administration at 800-772-1213 to discuss before delaying or turning down enrollment in Medicare Part B .
Most people are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A at age 65 . If you or your spouse have enough Social Security credits there is usually no premium charged for Part A. Enrollment in Medicare Part B is elective on your part , although Medicare will usually enroll you in Part B as well . If you currently are covered under an employer group health insurance plan you may delay enrolling in Part B without penalty .
No , enrollment in Part B Medicare is not mandatory . Some people put off enrolling in Medicare Part B until the next enrollment period -LRB- or more -RRB- after their 65th birthday because they are receiving good health insurance through the group plan offered at their place of employment . If you are enrolled in Part B Medicare automatically when you turn age 65 , you can turn it down . But do know the consequences of turning down Part B beforehand .
According to Social Security , you are automatically enrolled in Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . The two parts of Medicare coverage you are enrolled in are the hospital insurance and medical insurance . Hospital insurance -LRB- Part A -RRB- is established to help pay for your inpatient hospital bills and some of your follow-up care . The taxes you paid while working helped pay for Part A coverage , so it 's no cost to you . Medical insurance -LRB- Part B -RRB- is provided to help pay your doctors ' bills , outpatient hospital care , and some other medical services . If you choose to enroll in Part B , this coverage comes with a monthly premium . Some other parts of Medicare include : Medicare Advantage -LRB- Part C -RRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- Part C plans are made available in many areas across the country . Part C allows you to receive all of your health care services through medical plans offered by Medicare approved private companies . Once you are on Medicare , you also have access to Part D or Prescription Drug Coverage . This type of coverage helps pay for your doctor prescribed medication . If you are a Medicare Beneficiary with low-income , you may be able to get assistance through your state for the payment of your Medicare premiums . To see if you qualify for assistance , it is best to contact your state or local Medicaid agency or welfare office .
If you have been in the Social Security system you should automatically be registered for Medicare . In most cases a few months before you turn 65 you should receive your Medicare materials including your Medicare card . Most are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you do not receive your material , contact Medicare .
Most people will automatically be enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B at age 65 . If you meet the definition of Social Security disability you can enroll in Medicare younger than age 65 . When you enroll in Medicare you will need to decide if you want original Medicare and a supplement or an Advantage plan .
Most people will automatically be enrolled in Medicare Part B when they turn age 65 . If you are covered under an employer group health plan you may wish to delay enrollment in Medicare Part B . If you delay enrolling in Part B and do not have a valid reason you may be charged a late enrollment penalty .
Most people qualify for Medicare Part A when they turn age 65 . There is usually no monthly premium for Part A assuming you or your spouse worked and paid Medicare taxes . If you 're already getting Social Security or Railroad Retirement benefits you will be automatically enrolled the first day of the month you turn 65 . If you are not collecting benefits yet you can enroll for Part A 3 months prior to turning 65 by calling Social Security or visiting socialsecurity.gov / retirement . If you are under 65 , disabled and have been getting Social Security benefits for 24 months you will automatically get Part A & B . If you have ALS or End-Stage Renal Disease you can also get Part A & B .
Those who have worked in the Social Security system at least 10 years , are a US citizen or legal resident and have lived in the US at least 5 years are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B at age 65 If you are the spouse of someone who is qualified for Medicare , meet residency requirements and have been married at least a year , you are enrolled as well at age 65
You will be automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B if you are currently receiving Social Security benefits . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits you will have to request your Medicare benefits . You can go online or go by your local Social Security office to enroll . If you are going to continue to work and get your health insurance from your employer you may not need to enroll in Medicare .
If you receive Social Security benefits at age 65 , Medicare automatically starts at age 65 . Medicare will automatically enroll you in Part A and Part B . If you are not yet receiving Social Security benefits , you can start still start receiving Medicare Part A and B , or you can keep Part A and opt out of Part B until your group coverage ends .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The majority of Americans are enrolled in Medicare when they turn 65 . However , for those that are disabled and receiving social security benefits , you will automatically be enrolled in Medicare during the 25th month you receive disability benefits . Upon first enrolling in Medicare , you should definitely look in to obtaining a Medicare Supplement policy , also known as Medigap coverage . You have six months from your Part B effective date to apply for any Medigap plan of your choice , and no insurance company can turn you down or raise your rates due to any health problems you have . After that six month window , in most states , you may never get that right again . If you are not sure which Medigap plan would be best for your needs , consult with a licensed , certified health insurance agent that works with many different companies to ensure you get the best advice possible for your personal needs .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Is The Right Age To Buy Long Term Care Insurance ?
There are schools of thought that purchasing long term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- early on when youre healthy is the ideal time to buy LTCi . But other tributaries of thought say you should start seriously considering LTCi no later than age 50 . The LTCi market of insurance companies has decreased considerably . There are about six real players left in the brokerage community . The price tag generally drives the LTCi sales , but policy definitions should be the deciding factor when premiums are relatively equal .
There is no `` right age '' to buy long-term care insurance . That is factual . However , there are specific times when it may make a financially sound decision to consider purchasing a policy . For example , in your younger ages , the rates , as you may expect , is lower . Depending on your personal financial situation , this may be an ideal time to buy a policy . Each contract is different with many optional provisions . A full-time adviser is your best resource for information to this question . They not only are your primary source of information , they can shop the top carriers and plans so you get the best pricing . The number of companies that offer plans has reduced , so using a broker is more critical than ever .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product that is underwritten on the basis on medical and behavioral information . Medical information is based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Behavioral information is based on motor vehicle records , vocational and recreational hazards . Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
What age is considered young for long term care insurance ? When you turn age 50 , youll more than likely receive an invitation to join AARP . Most advisers start addressing long term care needs at age 50 as part of their retirement strategy for their clients . But age 60 seems to be the age where long term care becomes a serious consideration . But if your family has a predisposition to disease or a geriatric history of nursing home care , you may not want to wait until age 50 . When youre young and healthy , long term care insurance is relatively inexpensive . If your family fits this profile , you should investigate long term care even if youre age 40 .
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
The best time to buy long-term care insurance is anytime you are medically qualified to do so . The biggest problem people have is that they wait too long to apply , they get a condition or chronic health problem that is uninsurable by any carrier , and they are stuck with an LTC-friendly annuity as their only possible solution to how they might pay for long-term care costs . -LRB- This would be an annuity that does not require underwriting for the LTC benefit of the annuity contract , but allows for liberal access to the account value for payment of LTC costs . -RRB- Buying at a very young age does n't not have much of a financial advantage since premiums do n't really start to climb until about ages 50-60 . After age 65 , one has in reality `` missed the train '' and , assuming medical qualification , will pay a hefty price for a traditionally designed long-term care contract . However , there is another train behind the first one , and that involves designing the contract as a static pool of money with maximum access to it . It costs about half of thetraditionally designed LTCi contract , but it lacks any accommodation for the escalation of care costs over time . Still , it is better than no coverage at all . From an economic perspective , in buying young , one would have to weigh the cost of paying premium over a longer period of time . From an insurability perspective , however , one should remember that Superman -LRB- Christopher Reeve -RRB- did not know he would become a quadriplegic at age 41 . Also , many carriers have a `` preferred '' rate class , which may be a lot easier to get at an early application age . Recent claims history research has shown that a greater percentage of claimants are under age 65 and the number is growing . With some possible tax breaks on the payment of LTCi premiums - and possibly greater tax breaks in the future as Congress weighs the burden the uninsured elderly on Medicaid - one should seriously start planning for long-term care individually , as a couple , and for parents as early as possible . Death will happen . How long it takes to die may be problematic and costly .
Is long term insurance a good buy ? Well it all depends on your needs and your assets . The big thing long term care does is provide you a pool of money to help you choose what you want to have happen regarding your care . Without long term care coverage any situation that comes up where you need care , you 'll be faced with where ever will take you and quite possibly a reduction in assets to cover the cost . The idea of long term care being a good buy is strictly in the eye of the beholder . For some it does n't matter and for others it is just a matter of plugging in the right variables to make the plan work best .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
What 's the best age to buy Long Term Care Insurance ? There are many opinions as to the answer for that question , offered by professionals in the insurance field and in by professionals in the field of issues related to aging . As someone who has a background in both fields , I think the best age to purchase Long Term Care Insurance is by age 60 . Rates are lower and you are less likely to have a medical condition to disqualify you than if you wait longer than that . Some cite statistics that over 40 % of Long Term Care is provided to persons under age 65 , so you should purchase LTC coverage at a much younger age . But many of the younger persons in extended care facilities have mental illness or other lifelong conditions that would not have qualified them for LTC insurance in the first place . It is certainly true that the younger you are , the lower the rates , but you do have to offset the extra years for which you will be making those payments . More important than that , I believe , is getting the policy while you still qualify . If you see some health conditions sneaking up on you at age 40 that could be trouble at age 60 , get your Long Term Care coverage while you can .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Can I Get Long Term Care Insurance For My Parents ?
Yes you can obtain long term care insurance for your parents and it is a really good idea and a loving thing to do . Of course they will need to participate in the process including submitting to the medical underwriting requirements . You might want to purchase whole life policies for them and add LTC as a rider . In some cases taking that route may save you money over buying LTC by itself .
You can get Long Term Care Insurance for your parents as long as they are willing to go along with the application process . They will need to sign the application , take the required exam , and allow their medical records to be accessed by the LTC company . It is OK for you to purchase the policy for them .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Everyone comes into the discussion about long term care insurance from a different angle , because we all have different experiences . As an insurance website , we rightfully describe the financial implications of the products in question . But as human beings , we interject our experiences , as well . Some of us see it from the view of the caregiver/family , having been caregivers by default for a parent who did not have long term care insurance , or watched our `` healthy '' parent struggle to care for the sick one . Some of us have adult children urging us to get long term care insurance because they know that they would have to give up homes and jobs to come care for us . Some of us see it from the view of the person needing the care . Time spent in a nursing home quickly reveals those who could have had a higher quality life living in their own home , with the resources that LTC insurance provides . There are the `` rich '' in the single room whose resources are dwindling with each passing year , and who may eventually not be able to sustain that luxury of a private room by having to go on Medicaid . No matter what angle from which you view it , there are good reasons to get long term care insurance . There are also reasons not to get it , as Mr. Bridgers so eloquently stated about both sides .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Yes , a child can get life insurance for a parent . The parent must sign the application and do the exam , if an exam is required . If there is no exam required , the application process often involves a phone interview , and the parent must be able to answer the interview questions on their own . If you support your parent in any way , you can get a policy to help reimburse you after your parent passes . If you do not financially support your parent , you are still eligible to get your parent a small final expense policy . Contact an online final expense life insurance agency to get prices and types of policies available . It is a great thing you are doing ; all the best to you and your parent .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
The best place to start in purchasing life insurance for a parent is to discuss the idea with them . They will , at a minimum , need to sign the application , so you can not do it without their knowledge . If they apply for a small , simplified issue policy , they will probably need to do a phone interview with the insurance company . If applying for a larger policy , they will need to take a life insurance exam that my include an EKG and questions to test their cognitive function . If they are not willing to participate in the application process in any way , they can get guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- but will still need to sign the application -RRB- . In this first conversation , you can get an idea of what type of policy to look for by asking them how involved they want to get in the application process . At this time , you should also get a list of their medications and current and past health conditions . Most adult children are unaware of their parents ' complete health history . If your parent does not want to share that with you , they should contact an agent themselves , for their quote . You can find the most competitive rates for your parent at agencies that sell a selection of products . If the policy is going to be under $ 50,000 , there are agencies that specialize in those . The agency may call that type of policy Senior Life , as our agency does . Or they may call it Burial Insurance , Funeral Insurance , or Final Expense Insurance . If you are looking for a larger face amount , contact an agency that is experienced in Senior Life Insurance . If your parent has very serious health issues , Guaranteed Issue may be the way to go . Most companies will allow a child to pay for a policy for their parent . Whether or not you can own the policy will depend on a variety of factors . If you approach the purchase with the preparation explained above , it can be a very easy process and leave your parent feeling fulfilled , rather than frustrated .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is GST Applicable To Life Insurance ?
By GST I 'm assuming you are referring to Canadian Good 's and Services Tax . If this is the case , the answer is no . As of current legislation Canadian Goods and Services Tax does not apply to life insurance purchases . Ontario , however , does add a provincial sales tax to life insurance transactions .
In the United States no , as there is no Goods and Services Tax . In Australia life insurance is exempt from GST as it is a financial services good . In Canada GST presently does not apply , but legislation in Canada has been proposed that would subject life insurance to GST and some legislation has sought a retroactive application to life insurance for GST .
Life insurance is exempt from GST -LRB- Goods and Services Tax -RRB- in Australia because it is classified as a financial supply there , and Australia exempts financial supplies from GST . Likewise , there is no GST related effect when payment of claims are made by the life insurance policy . GST is also not included in life insurance premiums in New Zealand as life insurance is also exempt from GST in New Zealand .
By GST I 'm assuming you are referring to Canadian Good 's and Services Tax . If this is the case , the answer is no . As of current legislation Canadian Goods and Services Tax does not apply to life insurance purchases . Ontario , however , does add a provincial sales tax to life insurance transactions .
There are several ways that a life insurance company can know or learn that you smoke -LRB- what you smoke was not specified but we 'll go for tobacco on this one -RRB- . 1 -RRB- Self Reporting - they ask you on your application if you are a tobacco user and , depending upon the value of the policy being applied for , may ask for fairly detailed information on your type and frequency of tobacco usage . So , to honestly complete the initial application the applicant themselves should be the person informing the insurance carrier about their tobacco use status . 2 -RRB- Physical Exam - as a condition of your application you may be required to get a basic physical examination where things like height & weight can be verified and where , quite often , blood and/or urine samples are also taken to screen for health issues and to detect drugs such as Nicotine in the applicant 's system . 3 -RRB- Electronic Medical Records - most life insurance carriers will check your application 's answers against information about you in the Medical Information Bureau . An indicated history of tobacco use when none is reported on the person 's application would be an underwriting red flag . Also , information about whether you have been issued life insurance as a smoker , declined or rated as a smoker on a life insurance application can also turn up . 4 -RRB- Leg Work - few of us will have this problem , but if you are applying for a really large amount of life insurance the insurance carriers may actually conduct investigations into an applicant 's background and medical history . These may include interviews with friends and family . So , if they figure out you are really a Mafia boss rather than the president of the local trash company , your application for $ 50 million in coverage may get turned down . To take out a life insurance policy as a non-smoker when you really are a smoker would be an act of fraud -LRB- a misrepresentation on the applicant 's part -RRB- . And even if you were to get issued at a non-smoker 's rates that does n't mean you are home free . Life insurance policies standardly have a two year contestability provision in them where the insurance company can terminate or adjust the policy if it can prove that you made any false statements on your application . But , if your misrepresentation about your tobacco use is determined to meet the legal requirements of fraud -LRB- pretty good chance they will -RRB- then the contestability period is indefinite .
Yes , you can be declined for a medical condition and/or adverse health history as it pertains to `` morbidity '' . Morbidity involves a reduced ability to perform mental or physical activities . Such ailments as arthritis , cognitive impairment , Alzheimer 's disease , advanced osteoporosis , lung malfunction , and blindness are all classified under morbidity . If one uses tobacco and has any morbidity issue , that usually results in a decline as well , but smoking by itself does not often result in a decline.Underwriting for long-term care insurance is getting tighter . Genworth , for instance , will soon be requiring some medical work for applicants , which may include lab tests -LRB- urine sample and blood draw -RRB- . Carriers are also moving toward gender-based premiums , with male applicant costs being lower than female applicant costs due to the fact that more women go on claim than men . This is also true for most insurance , so it 's not a new concept . Life insurance costs are higher for men than women because women live longer . Disability Insurance has had gender-based rates for quite a while . Only Montana has mandatory uni-sex rates for all insurance.Before submitting a formal application for long-term care , an applicant should be pre-screened by completing a medical questionnaire provided either by the carrier or the representing agent . Applicants should answer all answers truthfully and completely to determine medical eligibility . It is better to be told not to submit an application due to confidential prescreening than have a formal application declined .
Life insurance policies are rarely voided . There is a specified period , normally two years , during which the company can deny a death claim if it is determined that the applicant made false representations on the application . I chose the word representation deliberately . An applicant is only bound by their personal knowledge and is therefore not responsible for any diagnosis made after the application is taken . The answers to questions are based upon the knowledge of the applicant not the actual state of affairs . One of the symptoms of alcoholism is denial and if the applicant does not believe themselves to be an alcoholic and no medical professional has diagnosed them as being an alcoholic , the insurance company would be hard pressed to ever deny a claim in the first two years . After the first two years pass the company can not deny a claim .
In addition to the good information given by the others on this page about smoking AFTER a policy is put into effect , I will address smoking while applying for life insurance . If you put on your application that you do not use tobacco , but then evidence of smoking is found in your labs or medical records , the application will usually not be voided . The insurance company will charge smoker rates , and if you have a health condition that is harmed by smoking , the application could be declined . Also , lying on an application about smoking then makes everything on the application suspect . This can also cause an increase in life insurance rates .
The reason the claim is being contested is because the carrier has a right , and a duty to its policyholders , to make sure that the application was accurate and information it contains did n't materially misrepresent the health or history of the insured . People do resort to different moral standards when faced with the end of life without adequate financial resources for their family members . And , agents may not provide the best guidance while assisting in application completion . Once submitted , however , underwriting a new application is usually thorough and methodical . Within two years though , when a claim occurs within the contestable period , there are enough reasonable questions about the health and condition of the insured that these issues are revisited as a matter of due diligence . That is why the contestable period exists . Claims laws in every state do not give the carrier the discretion to drag their feet and they must generally act on the claim within a reasonable period after it is presented . My experience is that the benefit is paid within 60-90 days or sooner if the application was accurate and all known issues were admitted and acknowledged on the application -LRB- when the cause of death is not in dispute -RRB- . Nevertheless , it is a difficult time to be asked to wait for the policy proceeds . It has been my experience that the delay is usually reasonable and almost always results in a death benefit being paid . When challenges are found to the veracity of the application , it becomes more complicated and these increase the chance that all that will be paid is the premium and interest and not the life insurance benefit . That is a rare event , on average . However , insurance companies can not be asked to pay for claims on individuals when their condition would not have been accepted and a policy issued . To conceal material fact is a reason any contract can be voided and life insurance is just another form of contract , in the end .
The number of questions on a life insurance application varies with the type of application it is . If guaranteed issue life insurance , the only questions that will be asked are personal and contact information . That is because they do not base rates on health ; everyone who applies gets the same rate . This makes the premium high for those who have good health , and the policy will be graded . But the policy is easy to get . With simplified issue life insurance , there will be more questions , and the application may be accompanied by a phone interview . The questions will include some health questions , tobacco usage , and most will ask about height and weight . The rates for this type of policy as usually not as high as guaranteed issue and not as low as medically underwritten life insurance . The applications for medically underwritten life insurance will usually have the most questions . They will ask about dangerous hobbies , family history , bankruptcies , past crimes , substance abuse , foreign travel , and more detailed health questions . In addition , they may order medical records from your doctor . While the most thorough , medically underwritten life insurance can deliver the best rates for those of very good health , and also can provide more coverage than the other types of life insurance offer .
A life insurance policy becomes effective when the first premium is paid and the insurance company accepts the application and underwriting approves the application . When all those conditions are met the policy is in force or in effect . If an applicant submits the first premium payment with the application typically a `` conditional receipt '' is given , which as long as there are no further conditions that need to be met after underwriting will make the effective date as of the acceptance of the application and premium payment .
Although Body Mass Index -LRB- BMI -RRB- is not one of the primary underwriting factors , it is directly connected to the Height and Weight parameters which are always primary items that are asked on an application for health insurance . An applicant that has a higher than normal BMI would be assumed to be overweight ; whereas an applicant with a lower than normal BMI would be assumed to be under nourished . Both of these situations would be deemed as a greater than normal risk to carrier ; should this condition exist , the applicant may be better off with an non-underwritten -LRB- guaranteed issue -RRB- life insurance policy . For a health insurance quote and/or application , you may follow the link : WEBSITELINK
In Canada , life insurance licensing is regulated provincially . A Life and Accident & Sickness license is required . Applicant are required to complete a Life Insurance Qualifying Program -LRB- LLQP -RRB- , which requires 100 + hours of study . Once this course is completed and the final exam passed applicants may write the provincial license exam . Once the applicants have successfully passed the licensing exam , they may apply for a Life and Accident and sickness license . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like speak with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The average price for home insurance can vary greatly based on several factors . If two different people applied for the same level of coverage on the exact same property , their prices could be different , based on how similar the applicants were . The primary factors that are considered for pricing home insurance include the age of the applicant , the occupation or education of the applicant -LRB- if the insurance company offers discounts for affinity groups -RRB- , the number of adults living in the residence , and the claims history for the applicant . And this is assuming we are looking at two applicants for the same property . There are factors that adjust the price based on the differences between properties as well , so the same person applying for two similar properties may receive higher or lower premiums based on the rating factors for the residence . For example , if the property has a pool , whether the pool is fenced or unfenced , the proximity to a fire hydrant , the age and type of roofing materials , and so on . Most policies I write for Home Insurance come out to be between $ 60 and $ 120 a month , depending on the level of coverage selected . But since every customer is different , and two homes on the same street will get different rates , I always recommend contacting a licensed insurance professional to obtain quotes . It 's best to get at least 2 or 3 quotes and compare both the premium amounts and the type of coverage . Do n't just buy based on price alone , or you may wind up with less coverage than you need .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Most individual life insurance plans are in effect on the day they are approved . In some cases the effective date can be the date of the application or a future date . If money is submitted with the application coverage usually goes into effect the date of the application once the application is approved . In the case of group life insurance plans , coverage normally goes into effect the first day you are actively employed in your new job , or when a new plan is installed .
When someone has Bipolar Disorder , life insurance underwriters will want to see that the applicant 's disorder is controlled and does not significantly interfere with the applicant leading a normal life . Compliance with one 's medication and treatment plan is crucial . The underwriter will want to see stability for at least a year . For a medically underwritten policy it is also important that the applicant is not on disability specifically for the Bipolar Disorder . If the applicant does not meet all of the above criteria , there are simplified , no exam policies available for most persons with Bipolar Disorder .
The first two years of a life insurance policy are called the contestible period . During these two years , if death occurs , the insurance company will likely review the life insurance application to make sure everything was answered in a forthright and correct manner . If the applicant lied about something on the application , or withheld some important facts , the life insurance may become void , although the premium is usually returned . Also , suicide during the first two years will void a life insurance payout .
A life insurance application requires sufficient information to positively identify you . The application also identifies the plan and face amount that you desire . It positively identifies who will receive the proceeds , and if they dont survive , who will be a contingent beneficiary . The application may include sufficient medical questions to get a good idea of your general health and then the application includes releases so that additional information can be gathered .
In simple terms , a life insurance quote is a proposal from a life insurance carrier to a prospective customer . The initial quote is generally based off of basic information about the person such as their age , sex , height & weight , tobacco use status and the amount of life insurance coverage they are seeking . For any meaningful level of life insurance the consumer should be aware that a proposal is only a proposal and not a firm offer of coverage . A life insurance quote is generally a contingent offer based upon best case assumptions . A life insurance application form will have to be completed in which the person applying for life insurance will have to answer medical questions and some lifestyle questions -LRB- do you skydive , etc. -RRB- . It is also likely that the applicant will have to take at least a basic medical exam where blood and urine samples will be taken . For high amounts of life insurance coverage a much more extensive physical exam may have to be taken before the applicant will be approved for coverage .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Is The Next Open Enrollment For Medicare ?
The next open enrollment for Medicare is October 15 to December 7 , 2013 . This is the fall open enrollment for 2014 . At this time you can change your Medicare plan , pick a new Medicare Advantage Plan , or pick a new drug plan . Call 800-MEDICARE for advice and information on what you would like to do during the next open enrollment period .
The answer to your question will vary somewhat depending upon where you are getting your health insurance . Are you a new employee anticipating your employer based coverage ? Or , are you a person looking for a personal , individual major medical insurance plan ? After January 1 , 2014 in the employer based setting and under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act , once you are hired as a full-time eligible employee or your hours are increased to full-time status , then the employer can not have a waiting period that exceeds 90 calendar days from the date you become eligible . So , an employer can have a waiting period of anywhere from `` date of hire '' to the 90 calendar days from date of hire . For administrative and payroll keeping purposes I am finding most employers are opting for a policy on a new hire becoming eligible for coverage on the `` first day of the month following 60-days '' . In the individual health insurance world we do have to keep the new open enrollment periods in mind and how failure to enroll during this annual election period can impact a person 's eligibility for health insurance coverage between open enrollment times . In other words , if you `` just did n't get around to it '' and you 've had no change of life status event since open enrollment closed then you ca n't take out a major medical health insurance policy until the next open enrollment period for a 1st of the year start date at best . -LRB- If you qualify you can take out a Short Term Medical policy to carry you through until then -RRB- Assuming yours is a normal individual major medical enrollment then the following rules of thumb apply to when your effective date of coverage is supposed to be ; 1 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted on or before the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the next month . For example , an enrollment submitted on December 10th would be for an effective date of January 1st . 2 -RRB- Completed enrollment form submitted after the 15th of the month will be for an effective date of coverage of the first day of the following month . For example , an application is submitted on December 20th would be for an effective date of February 1st . Open enrollment season for 2015 begins on November 15th , 2014 and runs through February 15th , 2015 .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The next open enrollment for Medicare is October 15 to December 7 , 2013 . This is the fall open enrollment for 2014 . At this time you can change your Medicare plan , pick a new Medicare Advantage Plan , or pick a new drug plan . Call 800-MEDICARE for advice and information on what you would like to do during the next open enrollment period .
The answer to how long it takes to get on health insurance depends upon the channel used for purchasing coverage . Most people get their health insurance at work . New employees can purchase coverage once they been with the employer for a specified length of time . Each employer sets this time frame in its plan documentation . Existing employees must wait for the employers open enrollment period , unless there has been a qualifying life event . People purchasing coverage as individuals through a state exchange can only enroll during an open enrollment period . The first open enrollment closed on March 31 , 2014 . The next open enrollment applies to policies effective January 1 , 2014 . People with a qualifying life event can purchase coverage without waiting for an open enrollment .
You can get health coverage through healthcare.gov on your own or go through a licenesed agent . We at WEBSITELINK have helped millions obtain coverage . You need to find out what you qualify for if your eligible to get tax credits . You can obtain coverage during the open enrollment period . After that , you have to wait until Novemeber 2014 to enroll in a plan during open enrollment . You maybe eligible to enroll outside the open enrollment period if you have experienced a qualifying life event . If you do not have a qualifying life event during the SEP -LRB- Special Enrollment Period -RRB- you may opt to obtain a short term plan to bridge the gap until the next open enrollment period in Novemeber .
Asking this question tells me that you need the help of a health insurance broker familiar with your marketplace . Do a Google search , call the Better Business Bureau , look in the Yellow Pages -LRB- if any one does that anymore -RRB- , ask a friend , but get somebody to do the leg work for you . Or , of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov and look up coverage there . When using HealthCare.Gov the consumer should understand that not all health insurance carriers are available through the government marketplaces and that provider networks and approved prescription lists may be different with the same carrier depending upon whether you are dealing with their products outside or inside of the government marketplaces . One good thing about ObamaCare is that the simple answer to your question is just `` apply with an insurance carrier . '' The bad news about ObamaCare is that they now give you a specific time of year -LRB- the open enrollment -RRB- for you to enroll in coverage and after that time only persons experiencing certain change of life status events can enroll for individual coverage outside the open enrollment period each year . You are asking this question nearly 2 months after the close of the first open enrollment period on March 31st , 2014 . If you could have enrolled during that open enrollment period but for some reason did n't and have n't experienced a change of life status event -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , having a baby , losing employer based coverage -RRB- recently then you technically ca n't enroll in major medical insurance again until January 1 , 2015 . Being uninsured will also technically make you subject to the individual mandate tax penalty when you do your individual income taxes next year . Do n't feel all alone , millions of people went through the first ObamaCare enrollment and still managed to stay uninsured . Some by intention other by inattention . If you can pass a few simple medical questions and coverage for pre-existing conditions is n't a must then I would suggest you look into getting a Short Term Medical policy to tide you over for the rest of the year . Be advised that Short Term Medical insurance is not viewedas meeting the requirements under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual mandate penalty . But , many people are finding that the cost of short term medical insurance is low enough against the prices of the new ObamaCare compliant plans that even taking the tax penalty into account they are dollars ahead with the short term policy . For advise please feel free to contact me .
No , not really . If you are talking about the individual health insurance market then your freedom of movement has been severely restricted by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . So , outside of the annual open enrollment period each year you can only change your health insurance coverage if you experience a change of life status event or special election period as defined under ObamaCare . Some examples are getting married or divorced , having a child or moving to another state or outside your current carrier 's service area in your state . Similar restrictions apply if you are covered under a group health plan that offers multiple options or one of the new private health insurance exchanges that some companies are moving to . An increasingly common situation that many consumers are being or will be faced with is finding out that their favorite physician is no longer participating in the provider network of the health insurance plan they enrolled in . Cancelling your coverage to switch to a new insurance carrier in mid-year that does have your doctor as an in-network provider wo n't meet the criteria for a change of life status event or a special election period . You could cancel your old coverage but you would have to wait until the next open enrollment period and the first of the year to get new individual health insurance . Failure to pay your monthly insurance premium is also not a qualifying event and can leave you out in the cold until the next enrollment period so do n't think about that as a strategy to change insurance carriers in mid-stream . While this was tied into a continuation of coverage under COBRA issue , I recently witnessed a heartbreaking example of this situation . I received a frantic call from the girlfriend of a man who has terminal cancer . At first she was unsure as to his last day of being covered under his employer 's plan and whether he had continued his coverage under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . In fact , the initial information she gave me was that he had not continued his group coverage and was still within the 60-day window that a person has to purchase individual coverage after losing their employer based coverage . If this had been the case , even though the man was being treated for terminal cancer I would have been able to enroll him in major medical coverage that would have had to cover his care immediately . After digging into this man 's situation more deeply we discovered that he had elected to continue his coverage under his former employer 's plan , had paid the first month 's premium by check but had then failed to make his second month 's premium payment and had his COBRA coverage cancelled due to non-payment . The fact that this man was undergoing intensive chemo & radiation therapy and being given massive doses of pain medications made it understandable as to how he missed making that second premium payment but that did n't stop the COBRA plan administrator from terminating him for non-payment . Unfortunately , as cancellation of coverage for non-payment of premium is not a qualifying event the individual major medical carriers were within their rights to decline him for coverage until the next open enrollment period and coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . This has left the man uninsured at the worst possible time and has his friends and family raising money for his care . If he is still alive by the first of the year I 'll be able to get him coverage but his life expectancy is not that great but the bills he is accumulating are .
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
Since there is now an Open Enrollment Period , you must wait until the next Open Enrollment to change your plan . Open enrollment for the upcoming year runs from 11/15/14 - 2/15/15 . The earliest effective date is Jan 1st , 2015 . There are a few exceptions which enable you to buy/change outside open enrollment , such as a change in income which would alter your subsidy .
While the Affordable Care Act eliminated health based underwriting , there are limitations around when you can purchase your policy , and when you would expect the coverage to become effective . The initial open enrollment period concluded on March 31 , of 2014 . If you have a pre-existing condition such as HPV you may have to wait until the next open enrollment . Plans purchased during this second open enrollment will be effective January 1 , 0f 2015 .
If you are covered under an individual policy you should be able to drop them from the coverage at any time during the year . The termination would generally be for the first of the coming month as your insurance carrier may decline to do a retroactive termination of coverage due to the possibility of recent unreported claims . You should note though that in today 's environment dropping your spouse from your individual coverage could leave your spouse uninsured until the next open enrollment period , which this year begins on November 15th for an earliest effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 . If your spouse is becoming eligible for Medicare then you will want to time the termination of the spouse 's coverage to match with the effective date of their coverage under Medicare . If you are covered under a group health insurance plan and you a having your portion of your health insurance premiums taken out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis then your employer has a Section 125 plan in place and this restricts changes an employee can make to their enrollment status outside of the group 's open enrollment period . A change of life status event as defined under IRS regulations would have to occur for you to remove your spouse from coverage outside of the open enrollment period .
Great question ! With the passing of the Affordable Care Act , it is now required that Americans have some form of health insurance . It can either be through the healthcare.gov site , -LRB- where you might also qualify for a rebate on the cost -RRB- through a private insurer , through a place of employment for you or your spouse , or through either the Medicare or Medicaid programs . There is a penalty for not enrolling in a plan , and it grows increasingly larger over time . There are limits for when you can enroll , and the next open enrollment period is not until next fall . There are some life events that will allow you to enroll before then , such as new employment , marriage , or the ending of a COBRA coverage . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Great answer Kevin . I would add that most States only allow 60 days to app.y for a new plan from the date your insurance ends so do n't dilly dally Also , once you choose COBRA and make your first payment you may not cancel COBRA to move onto a different plan until Open Enrollment . Example , you have paid for COBRA for 6 months and decide it 's too expensive , outside of Open Enrollment , you will not be able to use `` Loss of Job '' to purchase a different plan . You must wait till the next Open Enrollment -LRB- which is 11/15/14 for a 1-1-15 effective date for 2015 .
When you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older you will be in your initial Medicare Open Enrollment Period to purchase a Medicare Supplement . You have six month from when your Part B takes effect to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately with no waiting period . You can purchase a Medicare Supplement anytime you want to outside of your initial Open Enrollment Period but once your Open Enrollment Period ends you will have to answer all health questions to qualify for a Medicare Supplement . If you have a serious health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium to get the pre-existing health condition covered .
You will enrolled for Medicare Part A automatically when you turn 65 . If you are receiving Social Securiy you will be enrolled in Part B automatically and Social Security will start deducting your Part B premium from your monthly Social Security Benefit . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits Medicare will notify you 4 to 6 months prior to your Medicare open enrollment period that you are eligible for Medicare the first day of your birth month on your 65th birthday . Your Open Enrollment Period is a 7-month period beginning 3-months before your 65th birthday and 3-months after . You can reply to the Medicare enrollment reminder to enroll you in Medicare or you can decline Part B . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits you will have to pay the first 3-months of your Part B premium by check or money order . You can decline Part B without penalty as long as you are enrolled in an qualified employer health care plan . If you are not enrolled in such a plan you will be penalized 10 % each year when or if you apply for Part B . You can also use the Medicare.gov website to enroll online .
For a person in the individual health insurance market after January 1 , 2014 you can switch your health insurance in a limited number of circumstances under the requirements of the Affordabel Care Act . 1 -RRB- During the open enrollment period , which ended on March 31st , 2014 . The next open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 for an effective date of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . 2 -RRB- Having a change of life status event . There are several things that can occur in your work or personal life that would allow you to enroll or change carriers outside of the newly established open enrollment periods . Some examples are ; - Loss of employer based coverage due to termination of employment or reduction in hours . - COBRA expiration : your COBRA or state continuation of coverage period expires - Loss of a Government Sponsored Plan - loss of eligibility for Medicaid , CHIP , Medicare , TRICARE , Veterans programs , Peace Corps programs - Loss of Minimum Essential Coverage - loss of an existing policy with Minimum Essential Benefits such as ; a Student Health Insurance plan or State High Risk Pool coverage - Birth , Adoption , Foster Care or Legal Guardianship - Marriage - No longer being an eligible dependent ; loss of employer sponsored or individual coverage because you are no longer eligible as a dependent . Generally this would mean you have turned age 26 . - Divorce from a policyholder - Termination of a pre-ACA individual plan during 2014 -LRB- this does not apply to short term major medical insurance plans -RRB- - Moving : you move out of state , or to a new area that offers different plan options or is outside of an HMO plan 's service area - Returning from active military service - Being released from jail - Newly eligible or ineligible for exchange subsidies or premium tax credit or cost-sharing reductions . This would mean a change in income levels have either now qualified you for subsidies you did not previously qualify for or have disqualified you for subsidies that you previously qualified for . - A material violation by the health plan : the health plan you enrolled in violates a material provision of its contract This pretty well covers the situations in which an individual can switch their health insurance under the conditions of the Affordable Care Act .
Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- a dependent child can be covered on their parent 's health insurance policy until they turn age 26 . After you blow out the candles on your birthday cake when you turn 26 you have 60-days to obtain your own health insurance coverage . If you fail to do so within that 60-day period then you will be unable to enroll in ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance until the next open enrollment period for an effective date of the first of the year . In 2014 the open enrollment period begins on November 15th and the earliest date your coverage could go into effect would be on January 1 , 2015 . If you have missed your 60-day enrollment window then you could possibly take out a Short Term Major Medical policy to cover you until you can enroll in ObamaCare compliant coverage . Please be aware that Short Term Major Medical policies do not cover pre-existing conditions , some can decline you for coverage entirely , and they do not meet the individual mandate requirements of ObamaCare for the purposes of avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty .
Your current medical history does n't affect whether or not you would qualify for Medicare . In general , you must be 65 years or older to sign up for Medicare Part A & Part B . At age 62 , you would not be able to qualify for Medicare as you 're too young for the program - the only exception is if you are receiving social security disability benefits for more than 24 continuous months . If you 're receiving social security disability benefits , but have not met the 24 month rule , then you would not be eligible for Medicare . Please note , when you 're new to Medicare Part A and Part B , you activate a 6-month initial open enrollment period to also buy a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- with NO medical underwriting - meaning even with hep C , you can get one . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan . After your initial open enrollment period expires , you would be subject to medical questions for any Medigap plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any questions or need help with your Medicare Supplement coverage - you can reach me via the `` contact me '' button next to my picture . Thanks very much .
Your employment status does not effect your eligibility for individual health insurance coverage . The important question is how long have you been unemployed ? With the closing of the 2015 open enrollment period on February 15th an individual has to experience a `` change of life status event '' in order to enroll for coverage before next year 's open enrollment period . Loss of group health insurance coverage from a previous job is a change of life status event . You have 60-days after a change of life status event to enroll in individual coverage . You should have the option of enrolling directly with a major medical insurance carrier in your state or through the government health insurance marketplace . It should be noted that if you have recently lost employer based health insurance you should have the ability to continue your coverage through your former employer 's group health plan for some period of time . This will vary depending upon your state of residence and the size of your employer . If you worked for a company with 20 + employees they are subject to the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines and you could continue your coverage through them for up to 18-months as long as you pay the entire monthly premium in a timely manner . You have 63-days after termination of employment to exercise your COBRA continuation privilege . If you worked for a company with less than 20 employees then state continuation rules would apply and these do vary from state to state .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Where To Apply For Medicare Part B Benefits ?
You can apply online with the Social Security Administration for Medicare Part B benefits . The website for Social Security is www.SSA.gov . You can also visit your local Social Security office in person . When you activate your Medicare Part B it triggers an open enrollment period where you can apply for any Medicare Supplement Plan and not have to pass any medical underwriting . An Independent Medicare Insurance agent will be able to show you what 's available and help match a plan that fits your needs . There is a lot more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement Insurance on our website .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can Disability Insurance Cover Maternity Leave ?
Short Term Disability Insurance offered by an employer can cover maternity leave . There is a normally a requirement that you need to have worked for that employer some time before becoming pregnant in order to be eligible for this benefit . Private Short Term Disability Insurance , unfortunately , does not cover maternity leave . Long Term Disability , both group and private , will cover disabling complications of pregnancy or delivery .
To answer your question requires us to consider the requirements under law for the family medical leave act . The FMLA imposes upon employers certain obligations to provide the employee unpaid leave from their job without fear of losing their job . Employees continue to enjoy employer provided medical benefits as if they are active at work . Maternity leave is an eligible medical event . Employees are entitled to up to twelve work weeks of leave in a 52 week year . Seek out more information by searching the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 for more information . Now , as to obtaining an `` extended , paid maternity leave from your job '' , you seem to be asking on whether there is a way to buy an extended period of benefit for a group , employer sponsored medical or disability income program . I have not encountered this option as a benefit in 38 years of work in this industry but , the best option is to contact the benefits administrator or Human Resources at your employer with this question . No optional benefit available will waive the rights or duties of the employer under common policy and practice , nor under the FLMA of 1993 . There are indemnification type health insurance policies that may provide some cash benefit , and you can buy disability insurance prior to the pregancy that can cover medical as a disability , but they wo n't impact the employer benefits nor their right to expect you to return to work when their maternity leave expires . The indemnity policies and disability insurance will have specific underwriting requirements and being currently pregnant is likely to be a condition that prohibits a benefit until the pregnancy runs its course .
Disability Insurance may cover maternity leave if it is provided as a Group Short Term Disability plan and if the insured has met the criteria for qualifying for a claim related to maternity and childbirth . Private Short Term Disability does not cover maternity leave , nor does Long Term Disability Insurance , whether purchased privately or provided in a group plan . However , complications of pregnancy and childbirth are usually covered .
Individual disability policies do not offer maternity leave benefits . However , some group disability insurance policies may provide maternity benefits - not all do though -LRB- be sure to note that -RRB- . If you have a group disability policy , be sure to check the benefits under your policy - especially the definition of disability -LRB- many group DI policies feature a `` gainful occupation '' definition -RRB- - certain conditions likely will need to be met for a maternity leave benefit claim to be approved . If you 're looking for individual disability insurance or to set up a group disability policy , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group with a strong disability insurance background . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Short Term Disability Insurance offered by an employer can cover maternity leave . There is a normally a requirement that you need to have worked for that employer some time before becoming pregnant in order to be eligible for this benefit . Private Short Term Disability Insurance , unfortunately , does not cover maternity leave . Long Term Disability , both group and private , will cover disabling complications of pregnancy or delivery .
Groups short term disability insurance , or `` sick leave '' does usually pay for maternity leave . You need to obtain the coverage at least a year before becoming pregnant in order for the group policy to cover your time off before and after having your baby . Private Disability Insurance does not pay for maternity leave unless there are complications with the pregnancy or childbirth , upon which the long term disability coverage would kick in after the policy 's elimination period is met .
Short Term Disability Insurance offered through a group policy does usually cover maternity leave . Private short term disability insurance policies , unfortunately , do not usually cover maternity leave . Both types do usually cover complications due to pregnancy , childbirth , or recovery from childbirth , although those benefits may be provided through long term disability coverage .
Group Short Term Disability policies will usually pay for maternity leave . There is normally a waiting period of about 12 months so that the pregnancy is not a `` pre-existing condition '' . Unfortunately , private Short Term Disability policies not pay for maternity leave unless there are complications with the delivery or recovery .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Yes , short term disability insurance does cover maternity leave if purchased at the right time -LRB- meaning , before you become pregnant -RRB- and with a policy that states that it has that benefit . Unlike long term disability insurance , which only covers complications of pregnancy , short term disability insurance covers time off related to normal pregnancy and childbirth .
Short term disability insurance is used to cover illnesses and injuries that typically last under a year , or up to two years . Surgeries , chemo treatments , maternity leave , broken bones and sprains , and back injuries are some common ailments covered by short term disability insurance . The policy pays income to the disabled person until they can go back to work .
Maternity leave is the time taken off of work to delivery your baby and care for your newborn during it 's first weeks of life . Short Term Disability insurance is the type of coverage that covers that time off by paying the new mother part of your regular wages . It is also called `` sick leave '' by some businesses .
You can use Group Short Term Disability Insurance for maternity leave . This is only available though employers who offer it . Some states mandate that employers offer Group Short Term Disability , but most do not mandate it . Unfortunately , private Short Term Disability can only be used for complications of pregnancy . Long Term Disability does pick up when complications cause loss of work beyond the policy 's elimination period .
Alot of times , unless you have a supplemental policy through Aflac -LRB- they are one of the only companies i know of that has a plan that will pay you for maternity -RRB- you are going to be coming out of pocket . Also depending on your situation , your job may pay you for your costs when on maternity leave
You can get disability insurance , however it will NOT cover time away from work due to the pregnancy , unless you geta medical professional to sign off on a complication of such a nature as to merit time off . Regular pregnancy = potential chance at maternity leave should your employer offer it , but it does not automatically set you up to collect disability insurance checks .
Not all policies are created equal . Some short term disability policies will pay for your recovery for normal childbirth , and others wo n't . Most will cover lost income due to complications of pregnancy prior to delivery , or any postpartum disorders that delay your return to work . Policies sold directly to individuals do not cover normal childbirth . Only policies sold through groups do so . You can purchase individual coverage through a payroll deduction and pay the premium 100 % yourself . If your employer does not offer a voluntary option , you can ask them to make one available . Or you can purchase a policy direct , but it wo n't cover your maternity leave .
Most health insurance programs will not cover the reversal of any voluntary sterilizations . You may have to pay for the procedure out of pocket . The expenses are tax deductible , which may reduce the total net expense . IVF is a frequent alternative to tubal reversal , and is sometimes covered by insurance . Eight states have mandates requiring certain plans to cover IVF expenses . Your other alternative is to purchase a plan with a higher actuarial value -LRB- platinum or gold plan -RRB- . That way more of your pregnancy-related health care will be covered . In addition , you should purchase short term disability to replace income during maternity leave . This needs to start prior to conception .
Maternity riders are dinosaurs . They became extinct January of 2014 with passage of the Affordable Car Act . Previously , most individual health insurance plans did not cover normal childbirth . A maternity rider added this coverage to these policies . The rider came with a long waiting period , or with a large deductible . The Affordable Care Act requires that all health care plan cover ten essential health benefits which now include maternity and newborn care , and hospitalizations with no waiting period . The maternity rider is no longer needed .
The answer to your question depends upon three key factors . Many disability policies cover maternity leave , but many more do not . First , the policy has to cover normal childbirth . Policies sold through work site groups generally cover childbirth , while those sold directly do not . Second , you have to start the policy prior to conception rather than after . Third , the policy elimination period has to be very short . The standard benefit period for a normal delivery is six weeks , or eight weeks for C-section . If your elimination period is longer than two months , then no benefits are paid .
Will disability insurance cover maternity leave ? It 's going to depend on what your policy states in regard to payment of coverage where pregnancy is involved . There is n't a hard fast rule that pregnancy would n't be covered by a policy . It 's going to depend on the company and the contents of the policy .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When To Sign Up For Medicare Part A ?
For most people , Medicare Part A will come automatically on the 1st day of the month you turn age 65 . However , it is a good idea to go to the Social Security website at SSA.gov / medicare / or visit your local Social Security office to make sure . You should contact them 3 months prior to turning 65 . You will also want to sign up for Part B at the same time . If you are still working and on a group plan , your company may still offer benefits and you could delay your Part B. Medicare Part A & B do not cover all your medical expenses . A lot of people get a Medicare Supplement plan to cover the difference . With the right Medicare Supplement plan you could have very little out of pocket expenses . A independent agent that specializes in Medicare can be a big help in finding that plan that will best suit your needs .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B at the same time that you sign up for Medicare Part A , or you can wait to sign up for Part B until you have stopped working and no longer have group coverage . If you are receiving Social Security benefits , you will be signed up for Part A and B automatically just before your 65th birthday .
If you signed up for Medicare Part A & Part B during your initial enrollment period , then your effective date will be either the first of the month you turn 65 -LRB- this is the case for most individuals -RRB- or 2 or 3 months after -LRB- if you signed up after the month you turned 65 -RRB- . If you decided to wait because you were still working -LRB- e.g. on a group health plan through your employer -RRB- , then you may be eligible for a special enrollment period and set up an effective date for the first of the following month -LRB- you 'll likely need to complete the Part B enrollment at your local social security office -RRB- . If you decided to wait on signing up for Part B and do not have a special enrollment period , then you would be looking at signing up during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . If you 're signing up during this window , then your effective date would be July 1 .
If you are age 65 and have begun receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare Part A and B . You can sign up for an Advantage Plan or get Medicare Part D -LRB- or other letters -RRB- at that time , as well . You sign up for Medicare by visiting your local Social Security office , going to Medicare.gov -LRB- where you will be directed to a website where you can sign up -RRB- , or calling 1-800-MEDICARE .
The main way to qualify for Medicare is to be turning 65 year sold . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care .
You can also go to the website for the Social Security Administration at www.SSA.gov for information and to sign up . One important thing to remember when signing up for Medicare in Texas is that you have a one time open enrollment period when you first sign up for Medicare Part B . This means there are no health underwriting questions and you can select any Medicare Supplement plan available . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of your medical costs . The Medicare Supplement is designed to cover the remaining 20 % or some variation depending on what plan you go with . We have helped many clients through the Medicare Supplement process in Texas . You can compare Texas Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
You can decline Medicare part A with several restrictions . You can not get Medicare part B without having part A. Additionally , you will face a significant penalty for signing up after age 65 if you do decline Medicare part A . The one time individuals should decline Medicare part A is if they continue to work beyond age 65 and have employer provided health insurance . In that circumstance , the individual can sign up for Medicare when they retire , leave the company , or lose employer coverage with no penalty . Contact your company HR or local Social Security office for details . The company will normally provide a document to the Social Security Administration that the individual have employer coverage up until a certain date . It is important to start the process at least three months prior to your retirement .
Most people receive Medicare Part A premium-free because they have been paying Medicare taxes during their working life and met the 40 quarters requirement -LRB- equates to 10 years of working life -RRB- . Anyone who does not meet the qualifications for premium-free Medicare Part A would have to buy the coverage - the premium for Part A is $ 426 per month . The premium-free Part A requirements are : 1 -RRB- You 're 65 or older and you 're receiving social security retirement benefits -LRB- or are eligible for receiving them , but have n't elected to take them yet -RRB- , or you or your spouse had Medicare-covered employment through the government . 2 -RRB- If you 're under 65 and have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 months or have ESRD -LRB- end-stage renal disease -RRB- and meet certain requirements . So if you do not meet these any of those items , you 'll have to pay for the coverage . If you 're subject to paying the Part A premium and are under 65 , you may want to look at an individual health insurance plan on the health insurance exchanges instead . If you 're signed up for Part A , you 're likely signed up for Part B as well -LRB- Part B requires a monthly premium -RRB- . If so , I would suggest adding a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Part A & Part B. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medicare supplement programs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most people will receive Medicare Part A without paying a premium . If you , or your spouse , paid Medicare taxes during your working years you may not have to pay a premium for Part A. Others will be required to pay up to $ 441 in 2013 . The Medicare Part B premium for 2013 for most people is $ 105 . If you fail to sign up for Part B when you are first eligible you may be required to pay a late enrollment penalty of up to 10 % per year for every year you were eligible but failed to sign up . Higher income individuals may pay a penalty . In determining your penalty premium , Medicare considers your income from prior tax returns -LRB- from 2 years ago -RRB- . The penalty plus base premium is graduated based on income and can be as much as $ 335 in 2013 .
You can postpone signing up for Medicare if you prefer to - most people who do this are still working and on their employer group health plan . Even if you 're still working and on group coverage , once you retire/leave your group plan , you 'll have a special enrollment period to sign up for Part A and Part B -LRB- a.k.a. Original Medicare -RRB- . Part A is premium-free for most people so they 'll start this one up regardless when they turn 65 . If you 're not on a group plan , keeping an individual health plan will be very expensive . If you want to have healthcare coverage and are 65 or older , a combination of Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , a Medicare supplement plan , and a Part D plan will offer a very predictable healthcare expense structure .
Everyone should sign up for Medicare Part A & Part B when you 're first eligible -LRB- generally this is when you 're turning 65 years old -RRB- so you do n't get hit with any late enrollment penalties -LRB- there are ways to avoid the late enrollment penalty such as signing up when you 're coming off group health insurance -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you begin your initial open enrollment period -LRB- a 6-month timeframe -RRB- to apply for a Medicare supplement policy with no medical underwriting . You can apply for Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . If you need quotes for Medicare supplements , send me a private message and we can go over the input so we can find the program that 's right for you .
You can buy into Medicare after age 65 . There is a general enrollment period between January 1 and March 31 of each year during which you can sign up for Medicare . If you are not eligible for free Medicare Part A , the premium you pay may be higher than if you had signed up at age 65 . However , if you did not sign up for Medicare Part A and/or B due to being covered by a group health plan , you can enroll without penalty in the 8 month period after your quit working or the group coverage ends .
You can sign up for Medicare online at medicare.gov . If you are nearing age 65 , you can sign up in the three months before or after the month of your 65th birthday . If you would rather sign up by phone , you can call 1-800-MEDICARE -LRB- 1-800-633-4227 -RRB- . Or you can go to your local Social Security Office to sign up for Medicare .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B late , but there may be penalties . If you do not enroll in Medicare Part B when you first become eligible , you can enroll during the open enrollment period from January 1 and March 31 each year . If you sign up during this period , your plan will become effective July 1 . You will be charged an additional 10 % on your premium for every 12 months you went without coverage . However , if you did n't enroll because you were covered by a different insurance plan , you can sign up during the eight months following the end of that plan without a penalty .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to the website medicare.gov . There is an online form that explains about Medicare Part B and allows you to sign up right there . Or you can visit your local Social Security office to sign up , or call Social Security at 1-800-633-4227 .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
You can sign up for Medicare Part D when you turn 65 . If you are already 65 but have not previously gotten Part D because you had credible drug coverage from your employer , and you are now losing that coverage , you can sign up within 60 days of losing that coverage . There are other exceptions in which you can sign up throughout the year , but if you do n't have a `` Special Enrollment '' situation , then you would have to apply during open enrollment , which is Oct 15 - Dec 7th .
There are two , or possibly three , types of Medicare levy or surcharge that may apply . Medicare Part B will assess a surcharge on your Part B premium if your earnings exceed a threshold as determined by Congress . There is also a late enrollment penalty for Part B if you fail to sign up on a timely basis . A third kind of levy is on Part D if you do not sign up for D when you are first eligible .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Auto Insurance Does Not Do A Credit Check ?
Nearly all carriers use credit in underwriting . The only variable is what sorts of events they rate on and how important it is to the rating process . Many will overlook credit , although Effective Coverage works with at least one auto insurance company in Texas who does not do a credit check for auto insurance .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
I can only speak for the company 's that I have had personal dealings with , but I believe almost every company uses credit score as part of its rating equation . The credit check that an insurance company does is different from what a financial institution does.The check that the insurance companies perform is called a softcheck which should not affect your scoring with financial institutions to the best of my understanding . Laws change from time to time at both state and federal level . If the credit check is of concern to you , call your local agent and express this and they can advise of the current implecations of an insurance credit check -LRB- softpull -RRB- .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
Nearly all carriers use credit in underwriting . The only variable is what sorts of events they rate on and how important it is to the rating process . Many will overlook credit , although Effective Coverage works with at least one auto insurance company in Texas who does not do a credit check for auto insurance .
Some insurance carriers may use a credit score for rating purposes . Most of the insurance carriers in my state -LRB- New York -RRB- use a ` credit profile ' which means they access one of the big three credit bureaus and select specific items . What they select , how they interpret the data , and how it affects your premiums is not available for your scrutiny . In NY , credit profile is mostly used for new business quoting purposes for home and auto insurance . Carriers in NY load in a whole bunch of rating info when determining your premium - gender , age , marital status , own or rent your home , driving extract , # of years licensed , prior claims on home and/or auto policies , is your prior carrier preferred , standard , or substandard , distance driven to work , pleasuire or business use , and a lot more . Keep your ` credit profile ' and score as clean as possible . Most banks and credit unions have credit specialists who can advise you for free on how to do this . For example , pay all bills ahead of time if possible and always pay more than the minimum amounts . Do n't have credit lines totaling more than a certain % of your gross annual income , etc. . Credit profile is a major influence when getting insurance quotes . I know of no ` proof ' credit profile is a determinate of loss potential , but using credit profile for insurance rating is the way of the world .
Credit reports and scores are commonly used by auto insurance companies when underwriting and pricing the policy premiums . Credit scores have been shown to be highly correlated with future auto insurance claims . However , auto insurance companies do not report premium payment or claims information to the credit bureaus . So there is no direct impact of car insurance on your credit worthiness . However there may be an indirect impact on your credit if you suffer an auto accident while uninsured , or under insured . You may suffer from a loss of income if disabled . There may be extra medical bills , car repair expenses , and other liabilities . Any of these situations could make it difficult to make timely payments on any existing loans or debts . Late payments will certainly hurt your credit .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
The reason is just liked mentioned above . To see if they will get paid and how responsible are you . I have this questioned asked when someone is looking for full coverage and what surprises is the everyone check your credit . Buying an I phone ? Buying a car ? Leasing a Car ? Renting an Apartment ? Buying a home or condo ? Asking for a Loan ? . So out of everything i just mentioned the only thing that pays out in the event of an occurrence is Insurance . So why would n't they check your credit ? Remember when your asking for a quote online or over the phone and they say `` we have to run a financial responsibility check '' that 's a soft check that the company is doing . Almost every carrier that i represent now and have represented across five states in the past check credit . My suggestion to you is let the agent or company know if that the issue so they can tell you upfront if you qualify or not . Thank you and good luck .
If there is a carrier that does not credit check it is more than likely priced higher than a carrier that does credit check . Credit score is only one factor amongst many that are used to calculate the rate that an insured will be charged for the automobile insurance that they are seeking .
Yes the internet is flooded with thousands of insurance companies , insurance brokers , agents offering auto insurance rates online . It just takes a few minutes and few clicks on the mouse . The best thing about getting auto insurance is the competition among the carriers . Because of such competition , many of them offer the cheapest auto insurance rates for you . Shopping for the best auto insurance rates on the internet allows you the option whether or not to talk to an agent as well . Make sure when online have your old policy ready so you can refer to it for some of the questions you will have to answer . When buying a policy online or offline make sure you fully disclose your driving record . In some States while youre at it , check your credit score . Some auto insurance companies will not run your driving record at the time of purchase but they will run it on the back end and once they find out about your driving history and your credit , your rates will increase . So do the research before you buy .
When you apply to buy insurance , most insurance companies will take your credit into consideration . It is considered a `` soft hit '' . It will show up on your credit history that there was an inquiry , it does n't change or effect your credit . So whatever your credit score was before you apply for insurance is what it will be after applying . To my knowledge , California is one of the states that mandates insurance companies not take a person 's credit history into consideration when rating the premium . You can check with an insurance agent or broker licensed in your state to see if your state as the same rules .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
Most agents and brokers in New York use either the carrier websites or an online rating program to develop auto insurabnce quotes . Somewhere between 50 and 60 pieces of information are required just to select the rating ` tiers ' the carriers use . Some carriers have only 15 to 20tiers and some have over 100 . Your data isentered into the program . The carrier 's program uses this data to selectyour rating tier . Some factors such as : own or rent your home , gender , age , number of years licensed , driving record , credit profile , claims history -LRB- not only auto but property insurance claimsmay also be figured in ... -RRB- and on and on . Several years ago , only your driving record and claims history were the major factors involved . Today , your credit profile has a very major impact on how much you will pay - some carriers will not even develop a quote if your credit profile is not within their tolerances . So keep your credit score and profile as good as possible . Always ask your agent or broker for a ` guaranteed ' quote as some rating programs may not come up with a final ` guaranteed ' quote unless the agent or broker pays some fees for the data retrieval -LRB- of the credit data , claims data , and DMV extracts -RRB- to their system vendor or their carrier . In New York , insurance quote retrievals of your credit data are considered a ` no-hit ' to your credit status so you can ask several compnies to quote your insurance without penalty to your credit .
Many auto insurance companies will use credit scores to determine the premium rates to charge . Credit scores have proven to be very effective at predicting future claims . On the flip side auto insurance companies do not report claims data . When your report is accessed by the auto insurance company a soft inquiry is logged . Creditors and credit scores do not see soft inquiries , and therefor do not impact your score .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Life insurance underwriters do not bother to check credit on smaller policies , but they may check credit on policies with a large face amount or large premiums . If the credit score is extremely bad , the policy may be postponed until some attempts have made to improve one 's credit score .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
You certainly can . There are some companies that are more strict than others regarding credit , and may not offer auto insurance to customers with bad credit . But there are other companies who do n't use credit as a rating factor at all . But these are the extremes . 92 % of all auto insurance companies use credit at least to some degree . But each company weighs credit differently .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Much Should I Spend On Disability Insurance ?
A disability experience can ruin a persons financial condition in a very short period of time . Most Americans will experience a disability in their working life . That period of disability averages 30 months . Moat Americans have 90 days of cash reserves . If youre a midlife nonsmoker with good health you may pay 5-8 % of your compensation for disability insurance .
What you spend on disability insurance should depend on a combination of you financial needs and you personal budget . A disability policy is designed to replace lost income , so of course , the future of your health must be considered . There is no easy way to calculate your specific need since everyone 's budget is different and unforeseen changes always seem to occur . It is always best to consider each person 's situation individually , instead of making a general recommendation . An experienced full-time broker or financial planner is positively the best resource to help you determine the correct type of policy to purchase and from what carrier . The broker will shop all of the top-rated companies for you and review the specifics of the best options .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
That is an excellent question !!!! We could spend a whole lot of time on this , but I 'll break it down to three things . The first : Decide how you want your retirement to look . Travel , quiet home living , move somewhere , what do you want to do to spend your days ? Second , determine what that future will cost you . How well prepared for that future are you today ? How long do you have to make funding it a reality ? What kind of ground do you have to cover to ensure that it can happen the way that you envision it ? The third : Put together a plan that gets you there , or as close to there , as possible . That plan has to account for your risk tolerance , safe financial living in the meantime , and the ability to create the income that you will need . Spend a little time and put together for yourselves a snapshot of where you are , and where you want to be . Once you have that , find an advisor that you can trust , and get started making your dream a reality . If you want to spend a little more time on the details , please feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to help you . Thank you for asking !
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
To figure out how much life insurance you need with kids , you can make a little worksheet . Put down how much your family spends on average each year , and subtract your spouse 's salary from that . The difference is what you need to cover . Multiple it by how many years until your children are adults . Throw in extra for college . That is how much life insurance you may want to purchase .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
Some things to consider when buying disability insurance are : 1 -RRB- Do you want short term disability insurance , or long term disability insurance , or both ? Long term disability is recommended if you can not afford both , as the effects of being unable to work for many months or years is the most devastating . 2 -RRB- How much -LRB- what % -RRB- of your income do you wish to replace ? It usually makes sense to get as much as you can . 3 -RRB- Do you want to spend more to have Own Occupation feature ? If not , you will need to go back to work when you can do any job . With `` own occ '' you will be paid until you can go back to your own occupation . 4 -RRB- What about Residual Disability ? Getting a policy that offers Residual Disability enables you to receive a partial benefit based proportionate to the amount of income lost when able to resume working part time -LRB- unlike Partial Disability , which just pays a set % -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What does your policy cover ? Make sure it covers illness and injury , and review the conditions covered .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
A life insurance agent sells life insurance . Their job is a combination of marketer , school teacher , and entertainer . You spend most of your time looking for people who want to talk about insuring your family . Then you spend a much smaller amount of time teaching the person how everything actually works and what their options are . Then after all that you spend the next week trying to convince the insurance company to accept the applicant and that they are n't already one foot in the grave .
How important is having a paycheck ? Try to imagine no paycheck . How much money would you need to pay your bills if you were disabled 30 months , the average time of a disability ? So buy term and spend the difference on disability insurance . Its paycheck protection you need .
Hi Mom ! Great question ! If I understand your question correctly , you are asking how much insurance should I purchase ? I 'd suggest that you figure out what it would cost to have to pay for your services , should that have to happen . Include the cost of meals , snacks , and whatever else you are providing that a childcare facility would charge you for . Then I would add in the cost of your funeral expenses . Take a good look at your budget - what can you safely afford to spend each month ? Take that number , and decide whether you are better off with a term policy or a whole life policy , that you can let grow for awhile . If you would like help with this , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be glad to make time for you . I have a ton of respect for stay at home parents , it is a real job . Thanks for asking !
You know , there really is a right way to answer this question . I think the right way is to do whats best for you as the beneficiary . Life insurance is , after all , a care package from the insured to his loved one . It is a way of saying , I love you , and I take care of you now . Im going to make sure that an insurance company takes care of you later . This means that the golden rule is this : the quality of life you have now , is the quality of life you should have if you suffer the tragic loss of your spouse . If you are not making do with less now , you should not have to make do with less later . The money you need to pay your monthly bills now , is the amount of money you should have to pay your monthly bills later . The larger question is : for how long do you need this benefit to last ? For how long do you want to live off the insurance money ? There are a number of factors involved in that decision . First , and most important , is buying yourself the time needed to grieve and move on . Think about it . You have dedicated yourself to a life with someone . Now he is not there . And will not return . How long will it tell you to get back on your own two feet and renew your life ? Two years ? Five years ? Longer ? Then , what about your kids ? Theyve already lost one of their parents . Forever . They will need you more than ever . They will need you to spend as much time with them as possible . Can you afford to do this ? Life insurance can make sure the answer is yes .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
That is a great question ! The things that you want to know going in - what do I want the insurance to do ? -LRB- cover funeral expenses , leave an income , cover expenses , pay estate taxes , etc. -RRB- How long do I need it for ? -LRB- short term , or long term goal ? -RRB- How much can I safely afford to spend ? -LRB- what you want may not be what you can afford -RRB- For the agent , you want to know - how financially stable is your company ? Are you independent ? -LRB- a captive agent can only give you quotes from one company -RRB- and Who is your insurance with , and why ? I hope that helps ! Thanks for asking !
Most people feel that they need as much Disability Insurance as they can get , which is approximately 70 % of one 's regular income . The reason is , most people spend most of their income every month and feel that they could not get by on any less than that . If you only spend 50 % of your income on normal expenses each month , you could consider taking 50 % of your monthly income in Disability coverage .
If you are offered Disability Insurance through your work , yes , sign up for it ! You will most likely be paying a reasonable premium and have some income to pay your bills if you are unable to perform your job for an extended period of time due to illness or injury . If you are not offered Disability Insurance through your work , I recommend purchasing a long term disability insurance plan . One of the most common hardships I see in my job is people having to go on Social Security Disability due to MS , heart disease , cancer , or other health conditions . Not only do they face a pile of medical bills , they must wait many months without any income until they are approved for SSDI . With a private plan , they could be drawing their benefit much quicker , and the payments are greater than you get with SSDI . In fact , a private plan will supplement the SSDI to provide you with more spending money . Buying Disability Insurance is not cheap , but living without a paycheck for many months can be devastating . My vote would be , sign up for Disability Insurance . If you would like some assistance , I can help you find the most reasonable price from many companies .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
The literal definition of investment is `` the action or process of investing money for profit or material result . '' The basic categories of financial investments are ownership -LRB- stock , real estate , etc -RRB- , lending -LRB- bonds , CD 's , etc -RRB- , and cash equivalents -LRB- money market fund , CD , etc -RRB- . Disability insurance does not fit that definition and does not fit into any of those categories . However , informally , people often use this phrase as a way of asking : `` Which is a better way of spending my money ? This or that ? '' I imagine you are looking at your paycheck and wondering what is the most responsible way to spend it , considering all the things that could happen in the future . Well , based on that , Disability Insurance is a usually a good investment , because the chances of you becoming disabled are much higher than you dying , or going to a nursing home , or many of the other types of insurance out there . Also , losing one 's paycheck has a great impact on most families . If your paycheck is not crucial to your family , getting life insurance or other types of insurance may be a better investment .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Should Life Insurance Cost ?
Unfortunately , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs.The risk classification is the most critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends ona number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Also affecting the premium for a policy is your age , how much coverage you want/need , and how long you want to guarantee it for -LRB- term or permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to determine what coverage is appropriate/suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
There are too many factors that are taken into consideration to give a flat price on any life insurance contract . It depends on the age , tobacco usage , height , weight , medical history , family medical history , amount of coverage , company financial strength , strategy the insurance is being used for , etc. . To find out exactly how much it will cost you , meet with a local independent insurance agent or financial advisor and discuss your options .
Well , the cost of Life Insurance depends on the type of insurance you are looking at . Term is the least expensive life insurance available . Whole Life Insurance is generally the most expensive . The actual cost will depend on your age , the older you are , the higher cost of insurance . Your health and and the amount of coverage will also affect the cost of insurance .
That is a great question ! The way it is asked though , is kind of like , '' how much should a car cost ? '' That would depend upon the kind of car you want . The answer to your question depends upon the type of policy that you 'd like , the amount of coverage , and your health and age , for starters . Without more specifics , it would be difficult to give you an accurate answer . Generally , younger , healthier and non-smoking will cost more than older , unhealthy , and smoking . If you would like more specifics , please contact me , and I 'll happily give you a better idea . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! It is one of the most commonly asked , and most difficult to answer satisfactorily . There is n't a magical number or range that in good conscience I can give you . The reason for that is that the cost of your insurance is based upon a lot of factors for which I have no information . How old are you ? Are you male or female ? Do you smoke ? Whole life or term ? Coverage amount ? Those are just the beginning . If you 'd like a real idea , please contact me through the provided link , and I can give you a better answer . Thank you for asking !
My guess is that the answer to that question , `` What Should Life Insurance Cost ? '' will be different from every insurance agent you ask . Of course it depends on the type of life insurance and who the insured is , their gender , age , and health . It also depends on the face amount of the policy and if it 's a Term policy - how long is the term . The thing is that while the insurance industry is highly regulated and the insurance providers have to justify their costs in order to have their premiums approved , there is definitely a good deal of variance in what the different providers charge for similar coverage . You need to realize that the insurance company is taking all the risk , and that 100 % of all clients will eventually die and therefore a claim made on their policies . So what life insurance should cost is the amount needed to cover the insurer 's costs to provide the insurance plus enough profit for the company in order to insure that they will continue in business and be able to pay the benefit upon claim .
There is no set guideline for how much life insurance should cost . The age at which you buy the policy , and your health at the time of purchase , affect the cost dramatically . A person facing a probable long life ahead will pay far less than someone who can anticipate living only a few more years due to poor health and/or advanced age .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
1 . Is there an annual deductible ? 2 . What is the maximum annual out of pocket costs ? 3 . What does it cost to see a doctor ? 4 . What is the cost of lab work and x-rays ? 5 . What is the cost of outpatient surgery ? 6 . What is the cost of a hospital stay ? 7 . What are the wellness benefits ? 8 . What do prescription drugs cost ? The most important question to ask with respect to buying health insurance now is are my doctors in the network ?
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
My guess is that the answer to that question , `` What Should Life Insurance Cost ? '' will be different from every insurance agent you ask . Of course it depends on the type of life insurance and who the insured is , their gender , age , and health . It also depends on the face amount of the policy and if it 's a Term policy - how long is the term . The thing is that while the insurance industry is highly regulated and the insurance providers have to justify their costs in order to have their premiums approved , there is definitely a good deal of variance in what the different providers charge for similar coverage . You need to realize that the insurance company is taking all the risk , and that 100 % of all clients will eventually die and therefore a claim made on their policies . So what life insurance should cost is the amount needed to cover the insurer 's costs to provide the insurance plus enough profit for the company in order to insure that they will continue in business and be able to pay the benefit upon claim .
-- > Normal 0 You may first want to ask yourself the question , why am I buying homeowners insurance in the first place ? The most common answer is , should my home be damaged or destroyed , Id like to have enough money to fix or replace it . So that is a good place to start . How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? Its not an easy number to come up with but there are free tools available on the Internet to assist you with this effort -LRB- Google-Residential Replacement Cost Calculators -RRB- . Insurance companies normally do their own replacement cost estimates and will suggest or require certain minimum limits for specific types of coverage . Your lender , if you have one , may also have coverage requirements so your ultimate decision will be a combination of these factors . Just remember , you are the one buying the coverage and paying the premium . Make sure your needs and expectations are considered . The actual cost to rebuild your home will vary depending on local conditions following your loss . Hurricanes , tornadoes , wild fires and the like cause devastation to entire areas . Contractors , labor and materials may not be available at normal costs . Many insurance companies offer policies , which base the amount of insurance on normal building costs , but automatically increase the limit to whatever you need to rebuild your home should costs change dramatically following your claim . This feature is commonly referred to as Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost , make sure to consider this feature if it is available . Separate additional amounts of insurance will be included for your personal property , other non-business structures on your property and additional living expense . These limits are functions of the amount you carry on your home , normally they are more than adequate but make sure you are comfortable with them as they can be increased if necessary . The other major part of the policy will be your personal liability limit . That limit should be consistent with the liability limits you carry on your auto -LRB- s -RRB- and not less than $ 300,000 . If your net worth exceeds $ 300,000 , you may wish to consider Personal Umbrella coverage . Personal umbrellas are considered a less expensive way to purchase high liability limits . In addition , they usually provide broader coverage and do not have as many exclusions or limitations as basic liability policies .
Your homeowners policy should cover the amount it would cost to completely rebuild your home including re-engineering costs . It should be written on an insurance form that is considered `` All Risk '' . All risk coverage will not list what you are covered for , but rather , it covers everything that is not excluded . Typical exclusions include earthquake , flood , wear & tear , maintenance and intentional acts . You should cover your contents , or personal property , with a replacement cost endorsement . This will replace your items in your home rather than depreciate your personal property . Our office recommends at least $ 500,000 in Personal Liability coverage and Loss of Use coverage should you need to live somewhere else while your home is rebuilt or repaired . Hope this answers your question . You should check with your local independent insurance agent . They will help customize your policy for your unique needs .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A life insurance brokerage is a business through which multiple life insurance carriers are represented . The brokers that are affiliated with the brokerage are appointed with different companies . A successful brokerage one that really gets the job done for the consumer should have certain characteristics . First of all , it should specialize in one product line : life insurance . The broker should be a master of his craft . He or she should be an expert in life insurance underwriting , because it is through getting good underwriting that you deliver the best value to your client . Good underwriting can give you the lowest rate/highest cash value accumulation . If the broker sells multiple products , such as life insurance , and annuities , and disability insurance , and investments , etc. , then he really is a jack of all trades and master of none . Another point is that the brokerage should be run just as any good business is run . You make commitments and you deliver on them . This means that the sales model of the brokerage should be to provide a quote about which they are confident the client will be approved . It is common business sense to quote a reliable price . Prequalification should therefore be an essential part of the service the brokerage provides . Clients are entitled to know the company , product , and price before submitting a formal application . Then all involved can be sure that going through underwriting will be worthwhile . A brokerage operation should be designed to make the purchase of life insurance a very satisfying experience for the consumer .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
A basic Renter-type policy should cost you about $ 150-200 per year . A basic policy would include a nominal amount of coverage on your personal property -LRB- $ 15,000 or so -RRB- , cover you for specific named perils such as fire , theft , wind , vandalism , etc. and provide coverage for the additional cost of living in temporary quarters should your building be damaged by an insured peril and become unfit for living . In addition , it would be common for this type of policy to provide a nominal -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- amount of personal liability coverage . Although not included in most basic policies , I 'd suggest `` Replacement Cost '' coverage be requested . Should your property be damaged , instead of paying you the depreciated value of the property , you could claim the full cost for its repair or replacement . Very important in a serious claim ! Of course , higher limits and additional coverages should be available for an additional charge .
The best thing about a Universal Life policy is its `` flexibility '' . . The worst thing about a Universal Life policy is its `` flexibility . Your life insurance agent and you should be able to see the two important parts of the policy . First , the cost of the life insurance over the life of the policy . Most people buy and Universal Life policy because it is permanent . You should understand how you will be paying for the death benefit and what fees are associated with the insurance . The second part of the policy is the cash values . These cash values are affected by the current , guaranteed , and projected interest rates . The Illustration from the agent should contain projections of cash value based on any or all three types of interest rates . Universal Life policies are bad when the cost of insurance is too high or the cash value has inflated interest projections that cause the policy lapse or fail . If you have a Universal Life policy , you should review it annually with your life insurance agent .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How To Code Flu Vaccine For Medicare ?
To code the flu vaccine for Medicare you must specify which of the 5 vaccines were given : Q2035 Afluria Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- Q2036 Flulaval Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- Q2037 Fluvirin Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- Q2038 Fluzone Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- Q2039 NOS Not Otherwise Specified Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- You must still use HCPCS code G0008 for administration of the influenza virus vaccine .
To code the flu vaccine for Medicare you must specify which of the 5 vaccines were given : Q2035 Afluria Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- Q2036 Flulaval Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- Q2037 Fluvirin Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- Q2038 Fluzone Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- Q2039 NOS Not Otherwise Specified Vaccine -LRB- split virus , intramuscular injection -RRB- You must still use HCPCS code G0008 for administration of the influenza virus vaccine .
Medicare Part A and Part B do not cover the shingles vaccine . The vaccine is covered under Part D , prescription drug coverage . Contact your drug plan to see what your co-pay would be for the shingles vaccine . Medicare Part B will cover a yearly flu shot and the pneumonia vaccine .
The shingles vaccine shot is generally covered under your prescription coverage . Medicare Part D stand-alone prescription drug plans generally cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . Medicare Part A -LRB- your hospital insurance -RRB- and Part B -LRB- your physician insurance -RRB- do not cover the shingles vaccine shot .
Medicare roster billing was developed so that Medicare recipients could receive flu and pneumonia vaccinations in mass programs of 5 or more people at a time . The Pneumococcal Pneumonia Vaccines -LRB- PPV -RRB- and Influenza Virus Vaccines can be submitted together under roster billing , thus lessening the administrative burden of `` mass iimmunizers '' .
Unfortunately no , Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine . This vaccine is generally covered under a Part D prescription drug plan - most Part D plans will cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare will cover vaccines and immunizations that help prevent influenza -LRB- the flu -RRB- , Pneumonia , and Hepatitis B -LRB- for those at risk -RRB- - you would generally not be not be subject to any deductible , coinsurance , or copayments if your provider accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . For doctors who do not accept assignment , they may charge you an excess charge - Medicare supplement plans F & G can cover these charges for you . Some other shots can be covered by Medicare for other situations such as getting bitten by a dog and receiving a rabies shot or stepping on a rusty nail and getting a tetanus shot . You would generally be looking at Part D coverage for other vaccines .
Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine . It ` sgenerally covered under your prescription coverage . Medicare Part D stand-alone prescription drug plans will generally cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
In my state and when Obamacare kicks in completely I believe all states will cover vaccinations as preventative care . Depending on your state , you may already have kids vaccinations covered in full and adults as well . I know that when I visit my doctor , each year I get a flu shot , it is covered 100 % by my plan .
The flu vaccine is covered and is treated as preventive care . Preventive care should be covered at 100 % since the passage of the health care reform . Please be sure to inform the pharmacy about this benefit as there is currently a lot of confusion and people are paying out of pocket .
Flu shots administered by CVS are typically covered by Medicare Part B as long as the person receiving the flu shot has not assigned his/her health benefits to an HMO -LRB- Health Maintenance Organization -RRB- . CVS is an approved Medicare provider of flu shots and the shot can be given right at the pharmacy location .
Medicare Part B typically covers flu shots during flu season . One per season is the standard coverage . Of course , you have to be on Medicare to receive the coverage . Your physician must accept assignment for providing the shot to you and the Part B deductible would not be applied . If your physician does not accept assignment , the flu shot is still free but you may have to pay a nominal charge for the doctor 's fee .
Some vaccines are covered by Medicare , some are not . The herpes zoster -LRB- chicken pox -RRB- vaccine is one that is covered and is not . If the vaccine is administered in your doctors office , Medicare will not cover the actual cost of the vaccine if billed by your doctor . You must purchase the vaccine under Part D at a pharmacy . You can then transport the vaccine to your doctor so they can inject you . Makes complete sense , right ?
Medicare will pay for the flu shot once per flu season -LRB- i.e. once per year -RRB- . Shots are offered starting in the fall , and the flu season in the United States is considered to run from October to May . Medicare will pay for flu shots from providers that accept Medicare assignment .
Most health insurance plans will cover preventive care , including flu shots . Some plans will have restrictions on immunizations and will only cover these shots if you are under age 6 . Optional immunizations for older children and adults may not be covered by your plan . Many plans will cover flu shots if you are in a high risk group . High risk individuals include children , elderly and those with compromised immune systems .
It depends on what specific policy you have . While many carriers ' policies cover flu shots , not every policy under a carrier does . You will need to verify with the carrier or your policy 's agent to see if it covers the flu shot at 100 % , partial coverage , or not at all . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare does not cover the zoster vaccine . Zostavax -LRB- the common name for the vaccine -RRB- is for the shingles vaccine shot . Vaccine shots are covered under Part D prescription drug plans . You can use the plan finder tool on the Medicare.gov website to see what plans in your area will cover the vaccine shot .
Medicare Part B covers certain doctor 's services , outpatient care , medical supplies including medical equipment , some preventative services such as flu shots , ambulance , mental health , and limited outpatient prescription drugs . There is a co-pay required for benefits received under Medicare Part B. Medicare supplement plans can cover the co-pay and pay for things that Medicare Part A and B do not cover .
The Zostavax vaccine , or Herpes Zoster vaccine , is for the prevention of shingles in older persons , those whose health may be fragile , or anyone who wants it . Zostavax vaccine is covered by Medicare Part D , not Medicare Part B . You are responsible for co-pays . It is usually less expensive to get the shingles vaccine at a pharmacy .
No , Medicare Part B does not pay for the shingles vaccine -LRB- Zostavax vaccine -RRB- . All Medicare Part D plans are required to pay for the shingles vaccine . Many physicians do not stock it , but can give you an order for the Zostavax vaccine that you can take to a pharmacy that will administer it for you . You will be responsible for the co-pay .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Much Disability Benefits Will I Receive ?
Your disability benefits are a percentage of your salary at the time you took out the policy -LRB- unless you added to your coverage after taking out the policy , then it will be the higher amount -RRB- . Your policy will have that percentage stated in the printed copy of your policy .
You will receive the amount of benefits stated in your policy . Take the monthly benefit amount times the benefit period and multiply it by the up to the percentage of current earnings allowed . This will give you your total amount of benefit money paid to you in case of a total disability over the policy life time .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Disability Insurance will qualify for a business expense if the business pays for the policy and does not receive any of the benefit received . However the employee of the business will need to report any disability income benefits received as taxable income . The same holds true if a professional such as a physician or dentist is incorporated and has a salary or wage continuation plan in the corporate minutes . The corporation may pay for the policy but any benefits received are taxable as income . How premiums for coverage can be changed from year to year . For individual disability policies , in the event of a claim , whether benefits are taxed or not depends on how the premiums were paid during the year of claim . For group disability polices there is a three year look back for premiums . Overhead/practice expense disability policies are always tax deductible and benefits received by the business/practice are not taxable .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Disability Insurance benefit is based on your current monthly income . You should calculate how much your current monthly expenses are and determine the net benefit needed . If you have Disability Insurance through your employer then you will need to determine if the benefit is pretax or post tax . A pretax benefit paid by your employer means that you will be taxed when you receive benefits . Your net benefit would be substantially lowered after you pay taxes . You can supplement your work policy with an Individual Disability policy to make up the difference to meet you monthly expenses . An Individual Disability policy is underwritten by the company so will have to qualify based on health , age , tobacco , your occupation , and amount of your monthly income . Each company will have limits as to how much of your income you can cover with your policy . The percentage is usually between 67 % and 70 % . You should work with an Independent Agent and determine the best option for you . They will need to know your expenses , income , and the amount of benefit needed . The Agent will need to look for the company that best fits your desired benefit .
As with so many things in life , the answer is `` it depends '' . If you are talking about Social Security disability benefits it will depend upon the type of disability benefit you are receiving . Supplemental Security Income -LRB- SSI -RRB- disability benefits , which are for certain low income individuals e.g. - blind , aged , disabled and below certain income thresholds -RRB- who do not qualify for regular Social Security Disability can not have their SSI payments garnished for child support . On the other hand , standard Social Security Disability payments can be garnished to meet child support obligations . While it is much more complicated , it is also possible that a portion of VA disability benefits can be garnished for child support . Finally , if you are receiving disability payments through an individual or group disability insurance policy those payments can be garnished for child support purposes though the specifics vary from state to state .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
Yes , you can receive Disability Insurance and Social Security Disability Insurance at the same time . The Disability Insurance supplements the Social Security Disability benefit received , allowing the insured person to receive a higher total disability benefit -LRB- % of income replaced -RRB- than just receiving either insurance benefit on its own .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
There are several reasons to considering buying Supplemental Disability Insurance . 1 -RRB- Group Disability policies usually pay 60 % of your income in event of disability , and if your employer paid the premiums , the benefits are taxed . Thus , the benefit you actually receive may be approx 45 % of your income . Supplemental Disability Insurance is not taxed and can possibly raise this benefit to 70 % to 80 % of your income . 2 -RRB- Any group benefit will be lost when you leave the group . Having Supplemental Disability Insurance can be valuable if you no longer qualify for Disability Insurance upon separating from a job and its group benefits . 3 -RRB- Group Disability coverage is often `` own occupation '' the first two years , then changes so that you will no longer receive your benefits if you can work at ANY job , not just your OWN type of job . Supplemental Disability Insurance can extend the own occupation feature to last longer than two years . You could also add other features such as a Cost of Living Adjustment rider .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Durable Medical Equipment Covered By Medicare ?
Yes , durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- is covered by Medicare Part B . The durable medical equipment must be medically necessary , prescribed by your doctor , and used in your home in order to be covered by Medicare . It also must be durable , not useful to someone who is n't sick , and is used for a medical reason .
No . Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- covers durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- that your doctor prescribes for use in your home . Only your doctor can prescribe medical equipment for you . DME meets these criteria : Durable -LRB- long-lasting -RRB- Used for a medical reason Not usually useful to someone who is n't sick or injured Used in your home `` Used for a medical reason '' is analogous to `` medically necessary '' and exercise equipment is not deemed medically necessary . Exercise equipment is also deemed to be useful to someone who is not sick or injured .
Yes , durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- is covered by Medicare Part B . The durable medical equipment must be medically necessary , prescribed by your doctor , and used in your home in order to be covered by Medicare . It also must be durable , not useful to someone who is n't sick , and is used for a medical reason .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . An exception to this to have insulin covered under Part B is when insulin is administered via a medically necessary insulin pump - under this scenario , an external insulin pump and the insulin may be covered as durable medical equipment . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . If you 're looking for a Medigap plan or are interested in seeing if a lower rate is available compared to your existing plan -LRB- Medigap plans are standardized -RRB- , please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
No , exercise equipment is not covered under Medicare Part B as medical durable equipment , because exercise equipment is not considered a medical expense by Medicare . In order for any equipment to be reimbursed by Medicare , it must be considered medically necessary for the health of the Medicare patient using it .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- walkers , wheelchairs and power mobility devices , power lifts , oxygen , prosthetics , hospital bed , infusion pumps , nebulizers , CPAP devices for sleep apnea -RRB- . After the Part B deductible of $ 166 has been met Medicare will cover 80 % for durable medical equipment . If you have a Medicare Supplement it will pay the other 20 % .
Oxygen is covered under part b of Medicare . Under the durable medical equipment provision . Since it is under part b you would have to meet -LRB- or have already met -RRB- your annual $ 147.00 deductible and then Medicare would pay 80 % leaving you with the remaining 20 % . If you have a Medicare supplement that plan depending what plan you have , might pick up those costs that you are responsible for . If you have a Medicare advantage , look on your contract for durable medical equipment to see how the Medicare Advantage plan will pay for oxygen .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Exercise equipment is not covered by Medicare because it is not medical in nature . Medicare will only pay for durable medical equipment . Some items are covered because they are medically necessary ; some items are never approved , even if there is a need . Exercise equipment falls into the latter category .
Medicare does cover Durable Medical Equipment , however , exercise equipment would most likely not be covered . DME is most often things like wheelchairs , hospital beds , oxygen equipment , nebulizers and the like . In most cases , Medicare will pay 80 % and you would be responsible for 20 % . Depending on the plan you choose , the 20 % would be covered by your Medigap policy . To find out for sure , call 1-800-MEDICARE .
The Medicare Advantage plan with Humana will cover durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- at 80 % just like Original Medicare will cover it . The trick is in the details as Steve Adlman commented about previously . The biggest problem I see clients have is they try to get the medical equipment from a supplies that does not participate with Original Medicare or are not participating with the Medicare Advantage Plan the client has . -LRB- If they have an Advantage plan instead of Original Medicare -RRB- Obtaining Medical necessity takes time but is usually approved as the physicians know the criteria needed to get approval .
Blood pressure monitors for home use are not generally covered by Medicare as it 's not a listed durable medical equipment item . A couple of exceptions are sometimes considered to for it to be covered , such as : 1 -RRB- If you 're receiving blood dialysis in your home and a blood pressure monitor is needed . 2 -RRB- An ambulatory blood pressure monitor that records blood pressure readings for a 24-hour cycle for persons with `` white coat hypertension '' If an exception is granted and the device is covered , Medicare Part B pays for the rental of the monitor if rented from a Medicare-certified supplier of medical equipment . Medicare Part B 's portion would be approximately 80 % of the expense - you would be responsible for the remaining 20 % . If you have a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan , then the plan would cover the other 20 % . If you would like to look into purchasing a Medicare Supplement plan or see if you can lower the rate of an existing one , please do n't hesitate to contact me for help with your coverage . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
CGS Medicare stands for a Celerian Group Company . The company provides a variety of services for Medicare beneficiaries , healthcare providers , and medical equipment suppliers . CSG is a Medicare Administrative Contractor for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- for Medicare Part A , Part B , Home Health and Hospice -LRB- HH&H -RRB- and Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- .
Medicare will cover the rental , and sometimes purchase , of DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- deemed to be medically necessary . Your doctor must have evaluated your condition and completed a CMN -LRB- certificate of medical necessity -RRB- . You should only obtain equipment from a Medicare approved provider that accepts assignment . This will minimize your out of pocket .
Most DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- is covered by Medicare Part B . As for most DME 's , you must have a medical necessity for the equipment as certified by your doctor . After you have paid your Part B deductible , Medicare will pay 80 % of the allowed amount for a hospital bed and you pay the remaining balance . You should use a Medicare approved supplier that takes assignment to lower your OOP costs .
Medicare is looking at installing a new program in some parts of the country called the competitive bidding program -LRB- CBP -RRB- . The idea is to lower costs and create more accurate prices for certain durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- from suppliers . In short , suppliers `` bid '' to provide certain medical equipment and supplies at a lower price than what Medicare currently pays . Medicare then uses the bid numbers to set the amount it pays for supplies - winning bids are chosen as the contract suppliers for Medicare .
Yes , Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . This includes wheelchairs , nebulizers , blood glucose monitors , hospital style beds and more . For them to cover it , you need a valid prescription from the doctor which includes your name , date of birth , address , the type of DME that you need , the duration of time you will need it for , and a diagnosis code for the condition it is treating . With that prescription , any medical supply store that is contracted with Medicare will be able to provide the equipment .
Medicare is a national health insurance program . This means that the coverage you have in Arizona is exactly the same coverage you would have in any other state . You can use your medicare all over the country exactly as you could here as long as the doctor accepts medicare . Medicare Part A Covers inpatient hospital care , skilled nursing facility care , hospice and some home healthcare . Medicare Part B Covers , ambulatory services , durable medical equipment , mental healthcare , outpatient medical treatment , and limited outpatient medications .
Knee walkers can be a covered expense under Medicare if your doctor approves the equipment . As with any DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- purchase you should use a Medicare approved supplier that accepts Medicare assignment . Providers that do not accept assignment can balance bill you which will substantially increase your OOP expenses .
end question
start question
home-insurance
When To File A Claim With Homeowners Insurance ?
Whenever you experience a loss , it is best to the claim as quickly as you can . This will allow the claim to get settled as quickly as possible and allow you to get repairs done sooner . If you wait to file a claim , the processing of the claim may take longer as the adjuster will need to verify everything for the claim and some things may have changed with the items involved in the incident .
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
Claim history is a big factor for insurance companies but just because you have a claim does n't mean your rate is going to increase . Several factors are used to determine a rate including the length of time you have been with an insurance company , credit , type of claim filed , amount of claim , castropheclaimsect . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover `` sudden and accidental '' losses . It is not a maintenance policy and you do not want to file small claims . Filing frequent , small claims will cause your rateto increase or your policy may be cancelled .
Homeowners insurance comes in different forms ; in most States , if you have a Form HO3 -LRB- Special Form -RRB- or a Form HO5 -LRB- Comprehensive Form -RRB- , Wind damage is covered to your dwelling , other structures and personal property . If you have incurred damage as a result of wind , it is important to protect the structure from further damage immediately and file a claim with your insurance carrier . If you are not sure whether to file a claim and need advice , you should contact your insurance agent and discuss the options , size of the claim and prior claims activity that you may have had within 5 years . The policy deductible will apply to the claim , in many States , you will have a separate Wind deductible which may be expressed in the form of a percentage of the coverage section being claimed against . For a homeowners insurance quote , you may click here : WEBSITELINK
When you need to file a Homeowners Insurance Claim , the best and quickest way to handle it is to call the CLAIMS Telephone number listed on your Homeowners Insurance declarations page . Most carriers have a 24 Hour reporting line for claims ; the station is staffed by an individual trained to take an initial report and pass it on to the assigned claims adjustor based on the type of claim and geographical location of the loss . Once the preliminary report is taken , a claims number is assigned , an adjustor is assigned and the preliminary record is report to the National Database also known as CLUE ; CLUE is a tool used industry wide to review prior claims activity on homes . The CLUE report will later be updated eventual showing the Closed Status and total amount paid by the insurance carrier to resolve the claim . When making the initial claim report , it is beneficial to only offer a simple and general explanation of the nature of the loss ; it is always better to give all the details directly to the claims adjustor as the initial claims report is usually not taken by a person licensed and trained with the capabilities of the insurance adjustor.In most cases , the insurance carrier will assign and adjustor who will make an initial contact within 1 business day . The adjustor will make an appointment to come out and review the damages claimed , a detailed estimate of the required repairs will be prepared and the adjustor willinterpret the policy to determine if and to what extent coverage applies to the damage incurred ; the final process will be a resolution letter mailed to the insured with a full accounting of the situation and perhaps an associated check for repairs . In some cases , an initial payment may be offered holding back thedepreciated portion of the loss until thedamages or items are replaced after which the carrier will reimburse the insured for the full replacement cost of the items as long as the policy coverseverything on a replacement cost basis . Any specificquestions regarding a loss should be directly discussed with the claims adjustorwho is licensed and responsible to handle the complete transaction and explain the processto the insured . Prior to any claim occurrence , it may alsobe a good idea to contact a licensed insurance representative to learn the process and best recommended method of handling thesituation should youencounter a claim .
A fence is normally covered under a homeowners policy . Please contact your agent before filing a claim as a fence claim may not exceed your deductible and if it does there might be premium adjustments that would make filing the claim questionable . There are claims that you should not file .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
I am not aware of any way for an individual to file a claim with Medicare . Medicare requires medical providers to file claims directly on your behalf and do so on a timely basis . Claims are filed electronically , adjudicated by Medicare , and then Medicare files your approved claim with your Medigap carrier via crossover .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
If your homeowners premium increased you should check to see if the coverage amount also increased . If the coverage has not changed either the company has had to file for a rate increase due to the loss pattern in your area or you have filed a claim . Filing a claim can cause a discount you were enjoying to be removed regardless of the amount paid on the claim .
There are 2 ways to file a claim you can contact the carrier claim number that is listed on your policy or you can contact your agent that wrote your policy . I Always instruct our clients to contact us 1st that way we can document your file and make sure that your claim has been process right away and filed correctly . having to file a claim is stressful enough a good agent should be able to guide you through the process
In most cases , you do not need to file a claim to Medicare , as doctors/hospitals are required to file these claims for you in a timely manner for Medicare-covered services and supplies . If , however , your doctor has not filed a claim , you can contact them and ask them to do so or call Medicare at 1-800-MEDICARE . If it is close to the time limit -LRB- 12 months -RRB- and your doctor has not filed the claim , you can do so using Medicare 's Patient Request for Medicare Payment Form -LRB- CMS-1490S -RRB- . WEBSITELINK
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The fence is included in most homeowners plans . Since fences can vary widely in cost there is a possibility that the fence would need to be individually valued in the policy . For normal fencing the claim might fall near or below the deductible which would make filing a claim to be futile . If you lose all or part of a fence get an estimate and call you agent before you report the loss to the claims department . The changes in your next years premium for having filed the claim could make it advantageous to forgo making the claim .
In general , no , home insurance will not cover wet rot . A homeowners policy is there to protect you from the sudden and accidental , not the ongoing . To file a claim , you have to be able to pinpoint what happened and when it happened . Wet rot describes a long time , ongoing circumstance . Your homeowners policy is designed to make you whole after an `` occurrence '' . It 's not designed to maintain your home . If you have a condition that could , potentially , damage your home , it 's the homeowners responsibility to correct that condition to protect your home from future damage . This brings up the question of the cost of your homeowners insurance . Every claim impacts the loss ratio of your company and , ultimately , your rates . Want to control the cost of your homeowners insurance ? Take a higher deductible and pay for the smaller things yourself . You 'll save money in the long run .
Make a claim when the recovery is more than a potential increase in subsequent premiums . Basically I advise against making petty claims that come close to the deductible on the policy . Many companies provide substantial discounts for being claims free . Loss of that discount should be computed . Other companies , however , lower the deductible for years without a claim . So you need to have a clear idea of the recovery you anticipate before filing a claim . If it is a liability claim , never hesitate to file the claim .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Renters Insurance Should I Take Out ?
That depends on the valuation of the personal property that you own . Most carriers start renters insurance coverage at ten or fifteen thousand and one hundred thousand for liability coverage . The amount of coverage that you take out is a personal choice . Talk to a local agent about your coverage needs and they can help you get the coverage that you want and need .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
The best way to think about it is , to imagine that your unit has been gutted by a fire . You have lost everything that you own . How much money will you want ? If you take pictures of your unit you will know what you had . If you estimated the replacement cost for each item , you would know how much you would want . I suggest that number guide you in selecting a renters policy . If a process server appears at your door with a lawsuit , how much back up do you want ? I suggest you take as much liability coverage as the insurance company offers .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
Can you take out a life insurance policy on your grandmother ? That question , like most on this website , can not be answered with a straight yes or no . If your grandmother lives with you and you share in her income and expenses , you should be able to take out a policy of at least $ 100,000 on your grandmother . If you are buying a policy so that you can pay for her funeral , you should be able to take out at least $ 15,000 on her . If neither of those are the case , you may not be allowed to take out a policy on your grandmother . It depends on the circumstances , the company , and the type of policy you are buying . Insurance fraud often involves people taking out life insurance on older persons who have a short life expectancy , by younger people who have no financial interest in the lives of the Insured . Life insurance companies each strive to prevent that type of fraud in their own way , and thus you will find different regulations involving whether or not a grandchild can take out a policy on a grandparent . Suffice it to say that if the cause is legitimate , it is usually OK to take a life insurance policy out on a grandmother .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
There is no set guideline to how much you should pay for Term Life Insurance . There are general guidelines . E.g. . If you take a 10 year term policy , you should pay less than you would pay for a 30 year term policy . If the rates are similar you are much better off locking that rate in for 30 years . Another general guideline would be , if you can get a permanent policy for a price just slightly higher than term , take the permanent policy . Sometimes Universal Life rates run close to Term rates at older ages , especially if the UL rates are locked in to age 90 or 95 . Universal Life is much more flexible than Term , so if you can get it for a similar price , go for it . Aside from generalities , no one can predict how much you should pay for a term life insurance policy because life insurance rates are based on your age , sex , tobacco status , and health . You can check out an instant quote engine on internet websites to get an idea of what term rates might run for you . But you need to call the agency to get a more accurate rate .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Get Life Insurance With Cancer ?
While in the midst of cancer treatments , the only type of Life Insurance one can get is Guaranteed Issue . Since there are age limits on guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- minimum age is usually 45 +0 -RRB- , and since it is not available in every state , not everyone can get coverage while having cancer that is not yet removed , cured , or in remission . After a year or two of being cancer free , there are several simplified issue policies that are available in addition to guaranteed issue , and some of these will work for persons under age 45 . The farther out from the time of being last treated for cancer , the better the chances of getting a regular life insurance policy . The type and stage of cancer also enter in . To find out whether you can get life insurance as a cancer patient or survivor , call an agent who can walk through the questions with you and who has an arsenal of policies to choose from . Get one locked in now , and hopefully you can find a cheaper one in the future .
While trying to purchase a life insurance policy with a history of cancer can prove challenging , even if the cancer has been effectively treated and eliminated , it is possible in fact possible to get term life insurance with a cancer history . The rates for a life insurance policy is determined by the risk classification you qualify for . For example , a person who qualifies for a standard risk class would be viewed as having a normal life expectancy , while someone who only qualifies for a substandard rate -LRB- also known as a table rating and designated with letters A-J or 1-10 -RRB- is considered to have a shorter than normal life expectancy . Since the life expectancy would be considered shorter for someone with a history of cancer , a table rating may be assigned and a higher premium charged . Every life insurance company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may respond with a more favorable risk class offer than others even though they 're based on the same exact medical profile . There are several key items that insurance companies will look at to determine the risk classification assigned for your policy . Some of those items include : 1 -RRB- Type of cancer - colon cancer , breast cancer , lung cancer , prostate cancer , melanoma , ovarian cancer , skin cancer , or other internal cancers . 2 -RRB- Stage of cancer - Stage 0 , Stage 1 , Stage 2 , Stage 3 , or Stage 4 . Stage 0 is carcinoma in situ and means the cancer likely has not spread to other organs . Stages 1 , 2 , and 3 indicate more extensive disease with larger tumors or spreading . In Stage 4 , the cancer has spread to other organs and life expectancy is usually very short . 3 -RRB- If there was melanoma only , the `` Clark Level '' would be considered the same way the above stages are . 4 -RRB- Course of treatment how was the cancer treated ? Did you go through chemotherapy or radiation ? Surgery only ? Immunotherapy ? Bone marrow transplant ? something else ? 5 -RRB- How long since the treatment was completed/last date of treatment ? - cancer that was found and treated 5 or more years ago will be seen more favorably than cancer diagnosed only 1-2 years ago . The longer it 's been since the cancer was treated/eliminated/went into remission , the less likely it is considered to come back . 6 -RRB- Have you been treated/are being treated for any other health conditions such as heart disease , diabetes , high blood pressure , high cholesterol , abnormal lab test results , etc. . The best way to obtain term life insurance with medical history including cancer is with the help of an independent life insurance agent that represents many of the top insurance companies . They will be able to shop your full medical history for the best possible offer before applying for a policy . That way , you know what the most likely outcome will be before ever starting the process of filling out formal paperwork and taking an exam . Not only that , but there are no charges or fees for using the help of an agent -LRB- agents are paid by the insurance companies -RRB- . The insurance cost is exactly the same as if purchasing directly from the company . By law , the insurance company can not charge you less for applying directly . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including shopping the case , providing quotes , and comparing options , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
While in the midst of cancer treatments , the only type of Life Insurance one can get is Guaranteed Issue . Since there are age limits on guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- minimum age is usually 45 +0 -RRB- , and since it is not available in every state , not everyone can get coverage while having cancer that is not yet removed , cured , or in remission . After a year or two of being cancer free , there are several simplified issue policies that are available in addition to guaranteed issue , and some of these will work for persons under age 45 . The farther out from the time of being last treated for cancer , the better the chances of getting a regular life insurance policy . The type and stage of cancer also enter in . To find out whether you can get life insurance as a cancer patient or survivor , call an agent who can walk through the questions with you and who has an arsenal of policies to choose from . Get one locked in now , and hopefully you can find a cheaper one in the future .
It 's 2016 . Let me add to this with an updated reply : We work with about 12 carriers that offer Critical Illness . There only tends to be two `` not covered areas '' with some policies . # 1 . Certain types of Skin cancer are not covered . Skin cancer means melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer . Understand if and at what level skin cancers are covered . Melanoma of the skin , the deadliest form of skin cancer , is the fifth most common type of new cancer diagnosis in American men and the seventh most common type in American women . SO make sure skin cancer is covered . # 2 Know the difference between Invasive Cancer & Carcinoma in Situ -LRB- Non-Invasive Cancer -RRB- . All policies pay a reduced amount for in Situ . Carcinoma in Situ is the earliest form of cancer which involves only the tissue where it is found and has not invaded the surrounding tissue or organs in the body . So when the cancer is smaller and localized , it 's not nearly as `` threatening '' . The benefit amount for in Situ is a percentage of the full amount . So if you bought a $ 10,000 critical illness policy , a typical plan pays 25 % of the benefit amount for in Situ . Or in this example , $ 2500 . The good news is that the other $ 7500 is still there for you to access should the cancer spread . KNOW the percentage that is paid out . I still believe some carriers only pay out at 10 % for in Situ ... I suggest a carrier that is at 25 % . So this is n't a `` not covered issue '' . Invasive vs. in Situ is just know at what level your benefit pays out . Something else ... we lean towards plans that trigger a benefit upon diagnosis , not treatment of , the critical illness . Consider the organ transplant coverage . You need the $ $ way before the actual transplant . It can take months before you are 1st in line for an organ . As with all my other posts , we let underwriting determine the best choice for someone and then the coverage for the premium paid . BYE THE BEST you can qualify for folks ... . Reach out and I can work on getting you a copy of `` Stop Wasting Your Money on Insurance '' . - gravy
There is usually some type of life insurance policy you can get after being diagnosed with breast cancer . If you get a policy that covers you , either after disclosing that you have breast cancer , or because they did not ask -LRB- i.e. guaranteed issue life insurance -RRB- , yes , it will cover death from breast cancer or any other illness or accident . If you got a life insurance policy before having any idea that you were going to be diagnosed with breast cancer , the policy also will cover death due to breast cancer . We hope that the breast cancer never results in death . But if it did , you would be covered .
If your skin cancer is basal cell carcinoma , you can usually get life insurance at preferred ratings , as long as your other health is preferred . If it is squamous cell carcinoma , the insurance company will want to know if there was no recurrence after removal , and the stage of your cancer , if you know it . You can possibly be rated as good as standard after a year of being cancer free , and possibly better after extended years of showing no signs of skin cancer . With melanoma , it is treated like any other internal cancer . There will be a waiting period of at least a year to get a medically underwritten or simplified issue policy -LRB- unless perhaps the melanoma was in situ , or stage 0 -RRB- . If it was over stage 3 , there will most likely be a flat extra added for a while . But you can still get coverage . In time , the rates will go down as you hopefully remain cancer free .
I am a huge fan of Critical Illness plans -LRB- CI -RRB- . So I 'm happy to add to the great comments above . What is covered is always defined ... . yet there are a few `` twists to look for '' . Most CI plans have moved to a `` multiple bucket '' philosophy . Most cover the `` Big Three '' critical illnesses : Cancer , Heart Attack , & Stroke . What you have to understand is if the policy is a `` One and Done '' or a `` Multiple Bucket '' plan . One and Done means that once the benefit is paid out for one CI , then the policy terminates . Diagnosed with cancer , you get the check , but there is no benefit for hart attack or stroke . A multiple bucket policy usually has a benefit for different categories -LRB- buckets of money -RRB- : Heart/Stroke , Cancer , Other . So you could be diagnosed with cancer & a benefit is paid . Then the stress gives you a heart attack & a benefit is paid . Then after all that , some `` other CI '' happens and you get a 3rd benefit . ALSO consider what the definitions are WHEN a benefit is paid . Consider an Organ Transplant benefit . Does it pay upon diagnosis and being added to the national registry or does it pay when the physical transplant is completed ? That 's a biiiiig timing difference . Also consider the `` Carcinoma in Situ '' definition and benefit amount . That 's when cancer is isolated to one tissue type -LRB- general definition -RRB- . Being smaller & localized , a Carcinoma in Situ is generally `` not as dangerous or life threatening '' . I believe all CI plans with a Carcinoma in Situ benefit pays only a percentage of the full benefit . So if you have a $ 10,000 cancer bucket , yet it 's Carcinoma in Situ , do you get 10 or 25 % of the full benefit ? Hmmmmm . OR ... does the CI plan your agent is offering even have an in Situ ??? Most have in Situ benefits . Just double check . If you trigger the in Situ benefit know that you still have the remaining percentage left in case the cancer spreads . Usually called invasive cancer . If you received $ 2500 out of your $ 10,000 when it was in Situ , you still have $ 7500 in your `` bucket '' in case things get worse . Look at the riders -LRB- additional benefits too -RRB- . Return of premium upon death -LRB- other than a named CI -RRB- or return of premium after a named period of time , Mortgage payment , accident benefits , hospital benefits , and children 's benefits are riders offered by various carriers . Weigh the cost vs. the benefit based on YOUR specific needs . PLEASE consider coverage for your children . I know that if one of my girls was living in a children 's hospital fighting cancer , I 'd also live there . The cash injection can be financially life saving . HOPE all this helped ... - gravy
Cancer survivors looking at life insurance in the first few years after their treatment ends may have to settle for a graded policy -LRB- one that pays a reduced death benefit in the first 1-3 years for death due to illness -RRB- or higher priced policy -LRB- a flat extra per thousand is added on for a set number of years , then drops off regardless of whether the cancer has recurred or not -RRB- . Unless getting a guaranteed issue policy , there is at least a one year wait since the last cancer treatment before cancer survivors are able to get any policy . The more time that passes , the lower the rate usually becomes , especially if the cancer did not start out at a high grade . Since no one knows the future , I recommend getting what you are qualified to get as soon as you can , then try getting a lower priced policy in the future .
Most people can get life insurance after having skin cancer . If basal cell carcinoma , the rates usually are what they would be if the person never had skin cancer . If squamous cell carcinoma , it depends on the stage of the cancer , how it was treated , and for how long the person has been skin cancer free . A standard to low table rating is common . A diagnosis of melanoma will require that the cancer was a low stage , was successfully removed without recurring , and that a certain amount of time has passed since the last treatment , in order to get a medically underwritten policy . It may have a flat extra during the first few years of the policy . If that is not available , persons with past melanoma can usually get simplified issue coverage , and can definitely get a guaranteed issue policy if they qualify age-wise .
If they are still receiving treatments for cancer , cancer patients will be restricted to guaranteed issued life insurance . A year or two after the last treatment some simplified issue policies become available . And once the cancer has been in remission for a while , there may be some medically underwritten life insurance that persons with health history of cancer can get . A lot depends on the type and stage of cancer . Contact a good impaired risk life insurance website to obtain the most affordable life insurance with a history of cancer .
Yes , if someone has a life insurance policy and later passes away from cancer , the life insurance policy will pay the death benefit . The only exception would be if the applicant knew they had cancer but did not disclose it at the time the application was filled out , and if death occurred within the first two years . If the policy was guaranteed issue and the application did not ask about cancer , then not disclosing it will not matter . If someone is diagnosed with cancer and then applies for life insurance , the type of policy that can be obtained will be dependent on the type , stage and treatment of the cancer , and when the cancer was diagnosed and last treated . Life insurance almost never carries exclusions for cancer , but a graded policy can exclude paying the full death benefit for all but accidental death during the first 1-3 years of the policy .
Life insurance does cover death by cancer . However , it is common for someone diagnosed with cancer to seek out a life insurance policy , and at that point in time it is very difficult to obtain coverage . It generally takes at least a couple of years to obtain a medically underwritten policy after a cancer diagnosis , especially if over stage 2 . Of course , it also depends on the type of cancer , treatment needed , and effectiveness of the treatment . If a policy is issued , it generally is graded for 1-3 years , so that only a small amount is paid out if death occurs during that time . If the policyholder outlives the graded period . the policy pays the full face amount . As with every health condition , it is best to get your life insurance before a serious diagnosis . But whereas some health conditions cause your rates to go up more the longer you have it , the good news with cancer is that the longer you are in remission , the lower your rates usually go . So get what you can , and then keep trying every few years to get something lower priced . You will find that there are life insurance agents rooting for you , and who will work hard to help you get the best rate possible .
There is one type of life insurance that you can get while having any type of cancer , and that is called Guaranteed Life Insurance . It is not available at every age , and it is graded for 2 or more years . But it does not have any health requirements . You can also purchase pre-need policies at a funeral home while having cancer . With those , the graded period is usually one year . If your cancer was caught in the early stages and has a good prognosis , you should be able to get a policy other than guaranteed issue about a year or two after the last treatment . Some types of policies will add a flat extra that drops off after a few years . Others add table ratings to the policy . It all depends on the type of cancer , the stage , how well it responded to treatment , how long ago you were diagnosed and last treated , and whether your cancer recurred or not . Finding life insurance for persons with cancer can be complicated . Contacting an impaired risk life insurance specialist is helpful to find your best rate .
Cancer insurance is very important , Cancer is anepidemic . half of al men and a three of all women will get some form of cancer in their life time . The good news is that thanks to advances inmodernmedicine , many people aresurviving then every before . The bad news , Cancer oftens bankrupts survivors . Remembermajor medical plans or Medicare covers most but not all of your cancer treatment . But you will have significant out of pocket expenses from deductibles and coinsurance which can be paid by a good cancer plan . . More importantly to consider is the lost of income due to the sickness , Cancer treatments likechemotherapy , cancermedication and thediseaseit 's self takes a great toll on the body , leaving suffers unable to work or forcing them to reduce their workschedulesto take care of themselves and recover.You medical insurance will not provide you with money to pay your personal expenseslikemortgage , food orutilities supplemental cancer plans that pay cash to their policy holders like Afalc , give you money to cover these expenses .
There are three ways to answer this question . 1 -RRB- If applying for a new policy while having cancer , it is difficult to find a Term policy that will cover the cancer patient until cancer treatments have ended for at least a year . There are a few policies with graded benefits that will do so . The possibility of getting traditional Term life insurance grows as the time grows that the cancer is in remission . 2 -RRB- If applying for a Term policy with no history or signs or cancer , and just wondering if the policy would cover cancer in the future , yes , it would . 3 -RRB- If owning an existing Term life insurance policy and then being diagnosed with cancer , the policy will cover it .
The question is too broad and its never good to give false hope in securing life insurance when you have cancer . But what kind of cancer do you have ? What stage of cancer is it ? What medical regiment or surgery has taken place or has been recommended and not taken place . Life insurance underwriting has become more benevolent regarding certain cancers over the last decade . Age also can be a factor if the final underwriting offer . Some cancers can be issued standard . Recent bouts of late stage cancer can be declined . Keep in mind that there are recognized impaired risk life insurance companies that seem to specialize in substandard business .
If you have purchased the life insurance prior to being diagnosed with breast cancer , yes you are covered . If you have had breast cancer and looking to purchase life insurance there are some things you need to know . The type , amount and terms depends on the cancer itselfand how long you have been cancer free after your last treatment . To get into the standard ratings after breast cancer practically all carriers will want to see you cancer free for 10 years . Anything less than10 yearswill be a higher risk policy of either rated premiums or graduated benefits . Good luck .
Life insurance for cancer patients is usually restricted to guaranteed issue policies until a period of time has passed since successful treatment of the cancer . Guaranteed issue policies are almost never available to persons under age 45 , but there are some simplified issue policies that have much more lenient guidelines than others . To find life insurance for cancer patients , contact a good impaired risk life insurance agency and discuss it in person with an agent . If you can not get life insurance now , you can at least set up a plan for the future where you can get more and more coverage for less and less cost , the longer you are cancer free .
A lot of people think `` once you have cancer , you 're uninsurable for life . '' This is not true . If you 've completed your cancer treatment and a given amount of time has passed since it 's completion -LRB- generally 2 + years are ideal conditions for getting coverage approved by an underwriter . Some carriers may ask for 3 , 4 , 5 , or more years since completion , varies by carrier -RRB- , you can qualify for life insurance benefits . When you 're looking for life insurance and you have a history of cancer , you will definitely want to shop the case before applying for coverage with a company . Every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines . With cancer histories , the type of cancer , course of treatment , when treatment was completed , and other factors , may result in a wide variety of risk classes carriers will assign . Company ABC could come back with table 2 and Company XYZ could come back with table 6 . You will want to work with an independent agent/broker that can look at multiple carriers , not just a single one . The only point in time where a carrier is going to look at cancer as an auto-decline , is when treatment is n't yet completed . During this time , you 're best options for life insurance benefits will generally be a guaranteed-issue whole life policy -LRB- features a 2 year `` graded '' benefit period -RRB- .
Typically , yes . But lets cover some of the what ifs . What if you had no history of cancer , but then unfortunately come down with it after you take the policy ? Youre covered . What if you had a history of cancer , but didnt disclose it to the broker when you applied ? Nor did you tell him or the examiner about any doctors who treated you ? Thats a big no-no . Thats insurance fraud . The carrier could contest the claim in the first two years . To tell you the truth , they might even come after you after that . What if you just completed cancer treatment last year ? Carriers typically like to wait 2 to 5 years before making an offer . However , I have seen offers made sooner , under exceptional conditions . What if you are a woman , and you have no history of breast cancer , but it runs in your family ? With all other things being equal , you could certainly be eligible for coverage now . But the family history might preclude you from getting the rock-bottom rates -LRB- sorry - blame the actuaries :-RRB- What if you have an accident-only policy ? No coverage for illnesses such as cancer . But what if you had cancer , but tragically the cause of death was a plane crash ? Different story .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Should I Get Health Insurance Through Work ?
Most employers that offer health insurance are offering a group plan . There are rarely any qualifications for the coverage . The premium may be subsidized by your employer but there is normally some savings in the fact that it is group coverage . Your employer will probably deduct the premiums from your paycheck which will reduce your withholding and FICA taxes .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Your employment status does not effect your eligibility for individual health insurance coverage . The important question is how long have you been unemployed ? With the closing of the 2015 open enrollment period on February 15th an individual has to experience a `` change of life status event '' in order to enroll for coverage before next year 's open enrollment period . Loss of group health insurance coverage from a previous job is a change of life status event . You have 60-days after a change of life status event to enroll in individual coverage . You should have the option of enrolling directly with a major medical insurance carrier in your state or through the government health insurance marketplace . It should be noted that if you have recently lost employer based health insurance you should have the ability to continue your coverage through your former employer 's group health plan for some period of time . This will vary depending upon your state of residence and the size of your employer . If you worked for a company with 20 + employees they are subject to the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines and you could continue your coverage through them for up to 18-months as long as you pay the entire monthly premium in a timely manner . You have 63-days after termination of employment to exercise your COBRA continuation privilege . If you worked for a company with less than 20 employees then state continuation rules would apply and these do vary from state to state .
A life insurance brokerage is a business through which multiple life insurance carriers are represented . The brokers that are affiliated with the brokerage are appointed with different companies . A successful brokerage one that really gets the job done for the consumer should have certain characteristics . First of all , it should specialize in one product line : life insurance . The broker should be a master of his craft . He or she should be an expert in life insurance underwriting , because it is through getting good underwriting that you deliver the best value to your client . Good underwriting can give you the lowest rate/highest cash value accumulation . If the broker sells multiple products , such as life insurance , and annuities , and disability insurance , and investments , etc. , then he really is a jack of all trades and master of none . Another point is that the brokerage should be run just as any good business is run . You make commitments and you deliver on them . This means that the sales model of the brokerage should be to provide a quote about which they are confident the client will be approved . It is common business sense to quote a reliable price . Prequalification should therefore be an essential part of the service the brokerage provides . Clients are entitled to know the company , product , and price before submitting a formal application . Then all involved can be sure that going through underwriting will be worthwhile . A brokerage operation should be designed to make the purchase of life insurance a very satisfying experience for the consumer .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
The answer to your question will vary depending upon the health insurance company you are enrolling with , whether your coverage is through an employer or is individual health insurance , and increasingly with the time of year you are enrolling . If you are enrolling through your employer 's plan then it is reasonable to expect that it will take 5 to 10 business days for you to receive your new member packet with your physical ID card . Many group health insurance carriers have the functionality through their web sites for your HR person or for you to be able to print out a temporary ID card within 24 to 48 hours of their receiving and processing your enrollment form . For persons taking out individual health insurance it is usually around 10 business days after receiving your application that your new member kit with your ID card will be mailed to you . Some individual carriers also provide for the production of temporary ID cards from their web site after your enrollment form has been processed . When an individual is enrolling in individual health insurance during the annual open enrollment period you should understand that our nation has now gone to a system that forces people to enroll in a prescribed time period each year . Millions of people are being processed during this period and it strains the capacity of even the largest health insurance companies to process this volume of enrollments that are coming from both the government based health insurance marketplaces and from direct enrollments . While the process should get better with time , the first year 's open enrollment left much to be desired from an efficiency standpoint and the consumer should be prepared for longer waiting times to get their ID cards following open enrollment . In 2014 waiting times of well over a month were not uncommon and in some instances the waiting periods some people experienced were even longer .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
You can buy Medigap insurance direct through a carrier or use the services of an independent agent that represents several different Medigap carriers . When you buy direct from the carrier you pay the same price as working with an agent . The drawback to dealing direct is you will only be told about that carrier 's plans , you have no idea if the person you are talking to is knowledgeable about Medicare or if they were working at a fast food restaurant last month . When it comes to service you call an 800 number and hope a real person answers the phone that can help you . Most likely you will be routed to voice mail and then wait on someone to call you back . If you work through an independent agent you have the opportunity to check them out and get an idea if they understand the Medicare market enough to advise you , or if they are simply pushing products in hopes of earning a commission . I tell people how long I have been in the industry -LRB- 37 years -RRB- , which carriers I represent , and spend time listening to their questions and providing verbal and written answers . On several occasions I have been told that they learned more from me in 15 minutes than hours spent with numerous agents who insisted on coming to their home and then had to be told to leave . The method that works for you is the one you should pick . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
There are essentially 3 ways a person gets health insurance coverage of some type in our country ; 1 -RRB- Health insurance through an employer based group plan where you or a spouse work 2 -RRB- Individual major medical insurance , purchased either inside or outside of the government marketplaces 3 -RRB- Government Entitlement Programs such as Medicaid , Medicare and other state and/or Federal programs An experienced and knowledgeable insurance broker representing multiple insurance carriers can guide you through the system for the first 2 options . And , yes , you can go online and shop and buy health insurance and you might be great at that . However , most people are n't comfortable with the complexities of shopping their own health insurance and health care reform has made telling the differences between health insurance plans more difficult than ever . So , get some free personal help from a person who understands your needs and your market area .
You do not have to accept group coverage through your employer as you always have the option of purchasing an individual health insurance plan on or off the health insurance exchanges -LRB- if you qualify for a subsidy , you may want to look at on-exchange plans first - subsidies can not be used towards off-exchange plans -RRB- . If you have group coverage available to you through your employer and your spouse has group coverage through their employer and you only want to go on group coverage -LRB- and not buy individual coverage -RRB- , you generally would need to accept the coverage through your employer and would not qualify to be covered under your spouse 's group plan through their employer . You should be able to contact your company 's HR department to get a definitive answer regarding your specific circumstances because some rules for group coverage can vary depending on whether you 're a part time or full time worker , whether coverage meets ACA requirements for minimum essential coverage , and other factors . If you 're getting married , you would have a qualifying event for a special enrollment period to purchase an individual health plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
My sick sense of humor almost tempts me to say `` No , real estate agents are specifically excluded from getting health insurance by law '' but I wo n't do that . Yes , you can get health insurance . What you do for a living has no bearing on your eligibility for health insurance , especially now that ObamaCare is in full effect regarding guaranteed issuance of policies . In my experience , most real estate agents are self-employed/1099 contractor status people and not W2 employees of an agency . So , this probably means that you will need to get individual health insurance either through your state 's government health insurance marketplace or outside of it . So , just like you would tell those `` For Sale By Owner '' folks , you need to seek out an experienced health insurance agent who can assist you in obtaining coverage . If you have been without health insurance for more than 60-days and have n't had what is called a `` change of life status event '' -LRB- marriage , divorce , childbirth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- then you are in a time frame where you would be ineligible for enrollment in true major medical insurance until the next annual open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 and the earliest your coverage could go into effect would be for January 1st , 2015 . I hate to be the one to deliver this news but that is how ObamaCare works . Your only coverage option to carry you through until then would be to take out a Short Term Medical insurance plan . There are a variety of short term medical plan options available . However , you need to be aware that short term medical plans do still use limited underwriting questions , can decline a person for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . Please feel free to contact me if you need advice or assistance in this matter .
Yes , you can be on Medicare while working . Many people do postpone going on Medicare if they 're still working because they may have group health insurance available to them through their employer . Self-employed individuals will usually go on Medicare when they turn 65 unless they have group coverage available through their spouse 's work . Some may decide to go on Medicare if they 're 65 and still working because they want a more predictable health expense structure and/or want to lower their premiums .
Disability insurance policies typically have a 9 month to one year waiting period before they will cover pregnancy and childbirth . If you are considering having children , that is the time to sign up for the short-term disability . You may also want to consider a policy with a shorter elimination period . The elimination period is how long you must be out of work before the policy starts paying . Many policies have four weeks or longer elimination periods . The policy will only pay as long as the doctor says you need to be out of work , not how long your company allows you to be off work . The policy also only pays a portion of your salary , typically around 50 % to 60 % . If you dont get a disability policy through work , the next best option is often professional associations . You can also get an individual policy through an insurance agent .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Life Insurance Is Best Term Or Whole ?
That is a matter of personal opinion . I would recommend whole life insurance first . Whole life insurance has a lot more going for it in the long run . It typically builds cash value , is set to active until age 125 -LRB- as of now -RRB- , and it also has other benefits depending on the carrier . Whole life insurance is typically the more costly option of the two types . Term life insurance will typically allow someone to secure higher dollar amounts in coverage but at a lessor cost than whole life insurance , but it remains active for a set period of time . Typically 10,20 , or 30 years . Most people opt for a combination of whole and term life insurance to meet their needs . Contact a local agent to discuss yours and your family 's coverage needs .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Video Transcript : Next question is , `` What are the best whole life companies ? '' Well , I have to divide that into a couple of sections . One is , what are the best whole life companies for indemnification ? And what are the best whole life companies if you 're using this for supplemental income ? There are several great carriers out there that are really good dividend paying whole life contracts . If you 're using it for indemnification , you want to look at the most benevolent underwriter , because that 's the game that has to be played in permanent whole life , because you 're going to be paying this premium for the rest of your life . So , I want to find out from an indemnification or protection point of view , who gives me the best number because of my health consideration ? The secondary part is , if I 'm using whole life for an actual income play , I want to be able to use whole life and a contract that actually is going to give me more rate of return . And that 's how I look at it ; is it income , or is it indemnification ?
Whole Life covers you for your `` whole life '' . Term Life covers you for a term , or set number of years . Whole Life has cash value that can be utilized while you are still alive . Term Life does not -LRB- except for Term with living benefits , which allows you to use part of the death benefit if certain triggers are met -RRB- . Whole Life allows you to pay the entire premium at once , or in a limited number of years , after which no more premiums are owed . Term Life requires that you make periodic payments over the entire duration of the policy . If you drop a Whole Life policy after some length of time , you will usually have a reduced paid up policy that you can keep without making further premium payments . If you drop a Term policy , your coverage ends and you do not have any return of cash -LRB- unless you buy ROP , or return of premium Term Life -RRB- . With participating Whole Life , you may get dividend checks over the years . With Term Life , the only benefit you get will be if you die before the term ends . Whole Life costs more because it is a permanent product and has cash value in addition to death protection . Term Life costs less because it is temporary and offers pure death protection .
Whole life is not necessarily better than term insurance , but it can be . Whole life provides coverage , as the name suggests , for the whole of your life , it does not expire like most term policies . Whole life policies usually have cash values which grow in a tax advantaged way . In addition , whole life can provide additional financial and retirement planning opportunities . With term insurance you pay for the coverage and in most cases that is what you get - life insurance at a specified price for a specified term . If you need coverage for the long term , then whole life could be better . If you need coverage for the short term , then term insurance could be better . Another product to consider is Universal Life which could be better . What policy is right for you depends on your individual situation . An independent insurance broker can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I do n't think you can state whole life is actually better than term life insurance or term life insurance is better than whole life . It just depends on the need by you , the client . There are many different product options when it comes to life insurance . There is the right product for practically every situation . The true use of whole life is when there is a level premium need for life insurance your `` whole life '' hence the name . However , whole life insurance has become the Swiss Army knife of life insurance . The riders and cash value can be used for critical illness , terminal illness , children 's college funds to retirement benefits . There are now lots of uses for whole life insurance . Term life insurance is meant more to cover a need for a fixed amount of time . There are term limits that vary from annually to 5 years , 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , 25 years , 30 years and even 35 years . You may also set a premium on a universal life plan that does n't build cash value other than to level your premiums as far as age 151 years old . The main thing to consider which type of life insurance you need is to first identify your need for life insurance . A wise man once shared , you should buy life insurance like you will die tomorrow and invest like you will live forever . Find an experienced independent broker to help you identify your needs and shop the market for the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
Term Life Insurance is a temporary policy with very few moving parts . It has no cash value ; pays no dividends ; can not be paid off early ; and when the term is up , it goes way up in price , or else the policy simply ends . As such , it also usually costs less per thousand dollars of coverage than Whole Life costs . Whole Life accumulates cash value that can be borrowed from , used to pay the policy premium in later years , or collected if the policy is surrendered . It may pay periodic dividends . Whole Life policy premiums can be paid over one 's lifetime , or in one single premium , or over a set number of years . The biggest difference between Term and Whole Life is that Whole Life is permanent insurance that will last your `` whole '' lifetime . With these features , Whole Life usually has a higher premium than Term Life , although it is possible that if you keep buying new Term policies throughout your life , the cumulative premium of Whole Life may be lower than the sum total of all the Term policies , especially if your health declined over the years .
There are several difference between Whole Life and Term Life Insurance . Put very simply , here are some : 1 -RRB- Term life insurance lasts for a `` term '' ; Whole life lasts for one 's `` whole life '' . These both depend on payments to last that long . 2 -RRB- Term life insurance does not have cash value ; Whole life insurance has cash value . Again , how the policy and payments are set up will determine the amount of cash value . 3 -RRB- Term life insurance only protects against death ; Whole life has options to use the policy while alive . There are some Term policies that now offer `` living options '' , as well ; however , Whole Life offers even more options than those .
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
I am going to keep this simple . Let 's start with Term Life . Term Life Insurance covers you for the term you selected . The common term periods are 10-15-20-30 years . The premiums are usually guaranteed for the entire period of time . If you find a company that does not provide this guarantee , then I would shop around . Talk to your agent . After the term , the policy goes into what is referred to as annual renewable which can give you continued coverage however the rates are no longer guaranteed . Whole Life Insurance is permanent insurance designed to provide death benefit coverage until you die , your entire life , whether that is tomorrow or at age 105 . Not all companies are the same so be sure to do some homework . Whole Life Insurance is the oldest type of Life Insurance available and is usually the most expensive . Whole Life guarantees the premium you pay as well as the cash value you will have at a given time . Whole Life -LRB- WL -RRB- , a true WL policy pays dividends which can go back into the policy for more death benefit & cash value are pay you direct . There are usually several add-on 's or riders you can add to the policy to increase your coverage , add a child or spouse and on . Depending on what you are trying to achieve with the Life Insurance , both Term Life & Whole Life may be the answer . I would recommend talking to your agent/broker to help you decide how each of these will fit .
what is the best type of life insurance for young people ? In my opinion dividend paying whole life is the best choice for young people who have not yet put themselves in such debt that the option of whole life has to take a back seat to debt protection . For young people whole life is a great choice as the price is cheap , the benefit is large and the price is locked in . It is the absolute best window of opportunity to take advantage of what whole life can do .
There are agents who contend that people should only buy term life insurance , and other agents who feel that people should only buy whole life . Most of us , though , believe that there are places in financial portfolios for both term and whole life insurance . Just as life insurance products are created to meet different needs , the type of need you have is what makes term or whole life better for you . If your need is for a lot of coverage for short period of time , term would probably work best for you . If your need is for a policy to pay for funeral expenses , whole life is probably better . An agency that sells both types can help advise you so that you get the best policy to suit your needs .
No . If you have Whole Life and would rather have Term insurance , you could go a couple directions . 1 -RRB- Keep your whole life and purchase an inexpensive term policy to go with it.If you have been paying on your whole life for a long time , you may be able to quit paying premiums and still have a nice policy to keep for the rest of your life . You will probably never be able to purchase a new whole life policy as cheaply as the one you have now . 2 -RRB- Surrender your whole life and buy a new term policy . You may have some cash from your whole life that you can put toward your term policy . However , you can not buy term with a single premium - it must be on a pay period -LRB- monthly , quarterly , semi-annually , or annually -RRB- . So if you want to trade one for the other , put the money of the whole life somewhere where you wo n't be tempted to spend it on other things .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
There are many choices of life insurance available to you . The main stream life insurance products are term life , universal life , variable life and whole life . Each one has a specific purpose . Term life insurance is meant to coverage a specific period of time . The common terms are 1-5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . This means the rate or premium you purchase is guaranteed level for that period of time regardless of change in health , life style or occupation . Term life is commonly used for younger people starting out in life , covering a large debt , life a mortgage on a home or business debt , or covering for a young child 's education . term life insurance allows for the largest face amount for the smallest premium payments . Universal life and variable life are permanent life insurance solutions that build cash value . Typically the premiums are more expensive and the face amounts are less because part of the premium is going into a cash value fund that can be invested with numerous options . The cash value can later be used for retirement , college funds , critical or chronic illness or even to purchase a large asset like a home . The universal and variable options are typically more aggressive with the cash value funds . The last option , whole life insurance , is very similar to the previous universal life insurance options . However , the cash value funds are typically a fixed percentage of growth . Whole life as it 's name suggests is primarily meant to cover you for your entire life . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker with numerous carriers to shop the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Vandalism ?
Homeowners Insurance is most often written on Form HO-3 ; the Form HO-3 Homeowners Special Form does include damage from the perils Vandalism and Malicious Mischief . The coverage will apply to the Dwelling and Detached Structures covered by the policy ; however , the deductible will apply . On the other hand , if only Basic Fire Coverage is purchased , sometimes known as ` Fire & Lightning ' , there would be no coverage afforded for damage caused by vandalism . This would apply to forms HO-1 or DP-1 which are the most basic forms of coverage available for single family residences . It is important that you review your specific insurance policy to assure that you are certain of what is covered ; also , you may contact a company representative for a detailed review of your policy !
Vandalism to a vehicle is typically covered under the comprehensive portion of your car insurance . Fire , theft and vandalism are three of the biggest components of the comprehensive section of your policy . Usually , the deductible is considerably lower than your collision deductible . Vandalism is covered under your homeowner 's insurance policy , although it would apply to contents of your home , the dwelling and other structures . Vandalism to personal property inside a vehicle would be a different type of claim than the vehicle itself .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If your car is the unfortunate victim of vandalism , will your current car insurance policy cover the claim ? The answer to this question depends on the type of auto insurance coverage you currently carry . If you only carry the minimum liability limits , the answer is no . However , if you carry comprehensive coverage , the answer is yes less any applicable annual deductible you have selected for your policy . Vandalism to your vehicle could include a variety of incidents ; key scratches , broken glass and other damage caused with malicious intent . Vandalism is different than burglary . If something was removed from your vehicle as a result of the vandalism , you must be sure to state this in your report . In most cases , comprehensive coverage will cover both theft and vandalism . The amount of coverage your policy offers depends not only on the overall type of policy you have selected , but the coverage limits , the type of claim , and your chosen annual deductible . In the case of high deductible policies , it may be more beneficial to pay for the repairs out of pocket than to run it through your insurance company . Before any claim will be paid , you must file a report with your local police department describing the nature of the vandalism .
Homeowners Insurance is most often written on Form HO-3 ; the Form HO-3 Homeowners Special Form does include damage from the perils Vandalism and Malicious Mischief . The coverage will apply to the Dwelling and Detached Structures covered by the policy ; however , the deductible will apply . On the other hand , if only Basic Fire Coverage is purchased , sometimes known as ` Fire & Lightning ' , there would be no coverage afforded for damage caused by vandalism . This would apply to forms HO-1 or DP-1 which are the most basic forms of coverage available for single family residences . It is important that you review your specific insurance policy to assure that you are certain of what is covered ; also , you may contact a company representative for a detailed review of your policy !
A homeowners policy -LRB- primary occupied dwelling -RRB- written on a special form would cover vandalism . This is not to be mistaken with a rental property which may exclude vandalism , especially if caused by tenants . Check with your agent for the details and coverages of your particular policy to see if your policy includes vandalism coverages .
Air Conditioning Units are covered under Homeowners Insurance policies for the perils afforded against by the policy ; i.e. Fire , Wind , Hail , Vandalism etc. . . If the question is regarding repairs and maintenance , the unit would be covered either by a Manufacturer 's Service Contract or a Home Warranty Policy and not your Home Insurance Policy . Homeowners Insurance is designed to protect the home against covered perils to assist the homeowner from financial loss ; it is not designed as a repairs and warranty policy for appliances and general upkeep . Home Warranty policies are available for appliances and repairs of systems in homes ; the homeowner would have to pay a premium for the warranty policy and each service visit would be covered after a deductible which would be agreed upon on the policy .
Homeowners Insurance will cover any home fixtures against perils covered by the policy ; i.e. Fire , Vandalism , Wind etc. . . If your quetsion refers to the maintenance or repair of your heating system , your question should be referred to your Home Warranty coverage and not your homeowners insurance . In very few cases , homeowners insurance policies may offer a warranty endorsement which can be purchased and added on to your homeowners insurance policy . You must consult your present insurance carrier and inquire as to whether a home warranty endorsement is available and the premium charged .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Homeowners insurance is Fire Insurance and more . Homeowners Insurance covers a variety of perils . Many will cover any peril that is not specifically excluded in your policy . Most common perils covered are Fire , Hail , Wind , Lightening , Vandalism , and Theft . Your Homeowners Insurance also protects you for Liability if someone is hurt on your property and you are engaged in a Lawsuit .
Yes civil disorder is one of the perils most policies will cover . If your home is damaged or destroyed in a riot or civil unrest it will be repaired or replaced along with any personal property damaged or destroyed . Homeowners Insurance also covers vandalism if your home is damaged by vandals .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Unless you have a roof exclusion on your homeowners policy a roof is covered for the perils of the policy . Perils would include fire , wind , hail , weight of snow , lightning , falling objects , vandalism and potential water damage if caused by a bursting pipe . The homeowners insurance policy does not cover normal wear and tear . Also wind in some areas may have an exclusion or a separate deductible .
Vandalism to a car is not typically covered under a homeowners insurance policy . If you wish to have vandalism coverage for your automobile then you need to purchase comprehensive coverage from your auto insurance carrier . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverages provided by your policy and any exclusions that may be contained within the policy .
A leaking air conditioner may only be covered by homeowners insurance in the following 2 circumstances : 1 . If the air conditioning unit 's leak was caused by a covered peril -LRB- i.e. fire , vandalism , wind etc. . . -RRB- 2 . If the homeowners insurance policy has an Equipment Breakdown -LRB- home warranty -RRB- Endorsement affording coverage for the air conditioning system . Most carriers do not offer the equipment breakdown endorsement on a homeowners policy but it is worth asking your local agent or broker if one is available .
I think Jeff gave you a great answer yet I want to add one other consideration . While your homeowners policy will not respond to the vandalism , Jeff is correct that you may have personal belongings covered under your homeowners policy . In addition to the personal property you may have business property coverage under your homeowners . It will typically not be a lot and you may not have had a loss that includes business property , but we do see more people working at home and on the road , so that business property is not unusual . Read your policy and see your agent for more complete review .
Unless the roof was excluded from your originalhomeownerspolicy which is rare . -LRB- Possiblyfrom poor conditions when the insurance policy was first obtained -RRB- . A roof is covered for certain perils of a homeowners policy . If you carry special form you would be covered for Fire , wind , hail , falling objects , smoke , vandalism . The roof would not be covered for normal wear and tear which is the responsibility of the homeowner to maintain and upkeep . Specific details of a potential loss should be discussed with your agent as they would befamiliarwith your policy and specificcoverage 's .
A broken window may be covered by a homeowners insurance policy depending on what broke the window . If an object flew through the window or a vandal broke the window this would be covered minus your deductible . Of course there are other perils that could be covered as well . Just keep in mind your deductible does apply and more often then not if the window is the only damage the window is probably less then your deductible .
There are 3 policy forms for property insurance . Basic , Broad and Special . Basic will cover , Fire , Lightning , Windstorm or Hail , Explosion , Smoke , Vandalism , Aircraft or Vehicle Collision , Riot or Civil Commotion , Sinkhole Collapse , Volcanic Activity . Broad will cover all of Basic plus falling objects , weight of ice , sleet or snow , and accidental water damage . Special will cover everything that is not specifically excluded . If the policy does not exclude the coverage you are covered . Common exclusion are government action , nuclear hazard , war and military action , flood , fungus and pollution . Special Form gives you the broadest coverage 's . Now with special form you have a choice of an HO3 or an HO5 An HO3 is named perils for personal property and HO5 is open perils minus exclusion for personal property . While HO3 is the most common policy purchased the HO5 is the broadest coverage you can get in a homeowners policy .
It can . Vandalism is covered under comprehensive which is one of two types of coverage that can be included under physical damage on your auto policy . The other coverage that protects your actual vehicle is collision . Comprehensive and collision are required when you have a loan but are optional when you do n't . These two coverages provide protection for the car itself if it gets damaged and typically requires that you pay a deductible first before the insurance company responds . Typically , collision covers anything you collide or have an upset with while comprehensive covers everything else including fire , theft , and vandalism .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Life Insurance Brokerage ?
A life insurance brokerage is an entity that contracts with multiple life insurance companies in order to sell their products directly to consumers , or to consumers through other agents . In contract to captive agents , who predominately sell for one company , brokers are able to shop many companies to find the best rate for their clients .
A Life Insurance Brokerage is an office , website or entity where an organization of agents provide quotes and rates from many top companies . Typically , you can get great prices by working with a brokerage firm for life insurance since there are no fees . They are a great resource for information since they are involved full-time in the business .
A life insurance brokerage is a business through which multiple life insurance carriers are represented . The brokers that are affiliated with the brokerage are appointed with different companies . A successful brokerage one that really gets the job done for the consumer should have certain characteristics . First of all , it should specialize in one product line : life insurance . The broker should be a master of his craft . He or she should be an expert in life insurance underwriting , because it is through getting good underwriting that you deliver the best value to your client . Good underwriting can give you the lowest rate/highest cash value accumulation . If the broker sells multiple products , such as life insurance , and annuities , and disability insurance , and investments , etc. , then he really is a jack of all trades and master of none . Another point is that the brokerage should be run just as any good business is run . You make commitments and you deliver on them . This means that the sales model of the brokerage should be to provide a quote about which they are confident the client will be approved . It is common business sense to quote a reliable price . Prequalification should therefore be an essential part of the service the brokerage provides . Clients are entitled to know the company , product , and price before submitting a formal application . Then all involved can be sure that going through underwriting will be worthwhile . A brokerage operation should be designed to make the purchase of life insurance a very satisfying experience for the consumer .
A life insurance brokerage is a business through which multiple life insurance carriers are represented . The brokers that are affiliated with the brokerage are appointed with different companies . A successful brokerage one that really gets the job done for the consumer should have certain characteristics . First of all , it should specialize in one product line : life insurance . The broker should be a master of his craft . He or she should be an expert in life insurance underwriting , because it is through getting good underwriting that you deliver the best value to your client . Good underwriting can give you the lowest rate/highest cash value accumulation . If the broker sells multiple products , such as life insurance , and annuities , and disability insurance , and investments , etc. , then he really is a jack of all trades and master of none . Another point is that the brokerage should be run just as any good business is run . You make commitments and you deliver on them . This means that the sales model of the brokerage should be to provide a quote about which they are confident the client will be approved . It is common business sense to quote a reliable price . Prequalification should therefore be an essential part of the service the brokerage provides . Clients are entitled to know the company , product , and price before submitting a formal application . Then all involved can be sure that going through underwriting will be worthwhile . A brokerage operation should be designed to make the purchase of life insurance a very satisfying experience for the consumer .
That is a great question ! The role of the adviser is supposed to be as a guide to helping you select the best funds for your desired goals in your portfolio . They are to work with you in selecting funds that are a fit for your goals in risk allowance , growth potential , and fee structures . They are supposed to be experts in identifying well performing funds , trends , and emerging investments . Many of them are very good , and have clients that are well prepared for retirement . There are many of them that are paid by their brokerage house for the specific funds they want sold , and for the commissions and profits earned for the brokerage . Their focus may not then be so much on your needs as it is theirs , and that 's been the industry rub . The high fees hidden in the fund structure has led to an increasing number of investors switching to indexed funds -LRB- like Vanguard -RRB- or moving away from the brokerage houses and purchasing their leading stock investments themselves , and eliminating the fees and middlemen . Nobody likes to see that the person who is supposed to be making you money is making more off you than you are making . If you choose to invest in a mutual fund that has an adviser , please be sure to meet with them face to face . Interview them before investing . Ask about how they are paid , what the fees are for the fund , and real life performance on the fund , not projections . Ask how often the stocks within the portfolio are exchanged -LRB- anything close to 100 % is risky for you - they make money for the brokerage on the exchanges , increasing fundholders ' expense -RRB- . Shop for your mutual fund very wisely , before investing a penny . For all the touted returns , according to a recent DALBAR report , the average equities investor has only realized a 4.4 % return -LRB- for a 20 year study concluded in 2007 -RRB- , under-performing the S&P by more than 7 % , and after inflation , returning only 1.44 % . Do your homework , and look carefully before investing , okay ? Please do as we do - if the interview leaves you with more questions than answers , if you had a bad feeling about it , or if you felt that the adviser was elusive in their answers , thank them for their time , and move on . Again , like in any business , some are good , some not so much ; but it 's your future and your money , not theirs , so treat it accordingly . Please feel free to contact me if you have any specific questions , okay ? Thank you for asking !
Basically there are three distribution channels that sell long term care insurance : company direct , career agencies and brokerage firms . Buying direct from the insurance company or a career agency limits the comparison between polices that a consumer needs to have to make an informed decision . Brokerage firms have multiple companies and are generally more neutral in their selection process . Many brokerage firms have online portals that display comparison spreadsheets between insurance companies .
There is quite a bit involved when starting your own life insurance brokerage . First you need to be an experienced agent with a fairly large book of business in order for the carriers to offer you a brokerage contract . Next you will need a small team of sub agents ready to go with a recruiting plan in place to grow your team of agents . Once these two components are in place you will need to change your license over to a business entity license for the agency . You will need a fairly large capitalreserve for marketing , websites , web plug ins such as quoting software and lead generation . Next you will need office staff to answer phones , help with illustrations , manage cases for agents , set up training platformsand process applications . The contracts negotiations come with time and experience . As you grow the brokerage better contracts will come with volume . Good luck !
You should purchase life insurance from an independent agent or brokerage source that has access to the majority of life insurance companies that do business in the U.S. Objectivity in published brokerage spreadsheets can position you to make a wise determination on what life insurance company to buy based on their premium rank and policy provisions .
You should always purchase your life insurance from an independent life agent or life licensed , registered representative , who access wholesale brokerage shops with a huge inventory of life insurance companies . Be advised that proprietary career agents may offer their product line without shopping the inventory of life insurance available through brokerage .
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
There are several online brokerage insurance portals that sell life insurance direct to the public or use their own agent field force . Brokerage firms online generally maintain a significant inventory of life insurance companies and spreadsheet them by premium ranking . You 'll have a better opportunity in securing a competitive price .
Life insurance quotes are distributed through career , brokerage and company direct . Historically these offerings have not been as competitive as brokerage distribution channels , who offer many life insurance products from various companies . Some of these companies are on line . If the web site doesnt display several companies or a calculator that displays a spreadsheet of all companies , its not worth reviewing .
A Life Insurance Brokerage is an office , website or entity where an organization of agents provide quotes and rates from many top companies . Typically , you can get great prices by working with a brokerage firm for life insurance since there are no fees . They are a great resource for information since they are involved full-time in the business .
This is a great question . The answer is simple . Brokers/agent 's get paid a percentage of the premium you pay . That percentage varies depending on the type of life insurance and how that particular broker/agent is set up with an insurance company . For term insurance , a 20-30 year term can pay a broker/agent upwards to 120 % while a 10-15 will be lower . Permanent insurance such as Whole Life & Universal Life may pay the same as term or much lower , again depending on the company . Keep in mind that insurance companies do not start making a profit until about the 14th month or so . If you have more specific questions , do mot hesitate to ask .
There are two distribution channels for disability : the career and brokerage channel . Most planners recommend utilizing the brokerage channel because of their access to the full inventory of disability carriers . Mutual of Omaha is a leader is short term disability insurance . Standard of Oregon is a leader in long term disability insurance .
Disability insurance can be purchased in three ways : company direct , a career agent or a brokerage agent . Company direct promotes its own proprietary product , which may or may not be suitable for you . Career agents generally work for a main company with some access to other product lines . Brokerage agents generally have several insurance outlets and can present dozens of companies .
There are basically three distribution channels that sell disability insurance : Career , brokerage and carrier direct . Carrier direct and career distribution generally promotes its own manufactured proprietary product line . Brokerage distribution generally carries the more competitive disability insurance products and maintains a relatively neutral sales position , i.e. best company for the client .
You can purchase annuities at an online brokerage outlet thatdistributeshundreds of tax deferred annuities andsingle premium annuities to give you a broad based selection to choose from . Make sure that they also sell variable annuities as an option . some brokerage outlets don not sell securites and they may be product you 'll want to consider .
Long term careinsurance can be purchased in three ways : company direct , a career agent or a brokerage agent . Company direct promotes its own proprietary product , which may or may not be suitable for you . Career agents generally work for a main company with some access to other product lines . Brokerage agents generally have several insurance outlets and can present dozens of companies .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Get Car Insurance Over The Internet ?
You can purchase car insurance on the internet . In fact , online auto insurance sales has been increasing every year . There are any experienced online brokers -LRB- such as myself -RRB- that offer the lowest available prices from top-rated companies . High-risk and preferred drivers can obtain very low rates by shopping the right way !
Great question ! It is certainly possible to get quotes , and even sign up for insurance over the internet . I would n't advise it though , and here 's why : Any decision that you make that will have to do with protecting your family or finances should be made with someone that you can see face to face , and discuss your thoughts and concerns with . A live agent will care for your needs in ways that an impersonal internet can not . And the agent does n't cost you even a penny more than the internet does . Thanks for asking !
I believe you can purchase auto insurance over the internet in most states . While that may seem convenient it is the same system that will adjust a claim when you have an accident . The most critical issue is that the setting the limits will be entirely up to you . When you have a claim and find that your limits are inadequate , any savings you realized will feel like a major expense . There are times in our lives when we really want to talk to someone , which is often difficult with a website .
To sell Life Insurance over the internet , you need to set up an office just like you would for any life insurance business , except that everything must be set up to work efficiently and easily on the phone and internet . You need to get contracted with at least half a dozen carriers , get licensed in several states , and learn those insurance companies ' products inside and out . Once you are all set up physically and mentally , you need to purchase or generate leads . If you buy leads , you need to place at least 10 % of them to make any profit -LRB- unless you deal in large volumes , then the placement rate would not need to be that high -RRB- . You can supplement purchased leads by selling to friends , relatives and neighbors . You need a good website , as that is your identity to your customers . Whether or not it becomes a steady source of organic leads for you , it is a good idea to study up on ways to draw traffic to it . Each carrier and general agency has their own way of submitting business , interacting with you , and paying you . You need to look around until you are comfortable with the level of service you are getting , then be loyal to those carriers and that general agency . Those relationships will help you earn respect , result in better approvals and choices for your clients , and bring you referrals . Keep in mind , though , that it is much harder to cultivate repeat customers and referrals with internet business than in a storefront . The more common way of selling life insurance over the internet is to go for volume selling . In other words , get leads at as low a price as possible , set up streamlined ways of working them , and hit as many as you can , as hard as you can , as often as you can . Our style is more personal , but it takes years to see this more personal style come to fruition . Just find your path and do it with all your mind , heart and strength !
Great question ! It is certainly possible to get quotes , and even sign up for insurance over the internet . I would n't advise it though , and here 's why : Any decision that you make that will have to do with protecting your family or finances should be made with someone that you can see face to face , and discuss your thoughts and concerns with . A live agent will care for your needs in ways that an impersonal internet can not . And the agent does n't cost you even a penny more than the internet does . Thanks for asking !
You can buy Medigap from a carrier , through the Medicare `` hotline '' , from an agent that comes to your home or you can buy from an agent over the phone and internet . If you buy from a carrier or through Medicare you are giving up personal service . Any questions will be handled by whoever answers the phone . If you do n't mind strangers in your home , you can invite one -LRB- or more -RRB- agents to come to your home and pitch you on the various plans . I have conducted business by phone and internet for almost 20 years . Most folks like to shop in the comfort of their home and the ability to make a decision in their own time frame . Over 400 clients ca n't be all wrong .
Banner Life is an A + rated -LRB- A.M. Best -RRB- , AA - -LRB- S & P -RRB- carrier that specializes in term , permanent , universal and an array of life insurance products . Originally The Government Employees Life Insurance Company -LRB- GELICO -RRB- in 1949 the company eventually became Banner Life . As of 2012 , Banner has over $ 517 billion of life insurance in force and over $ 5.7 billion in assets . Out of the Maryland , this company utilizes the internet and internet technologies to deliver easy to use products to its clients . Excellent carrier and competitive prices across the board . For more information on Banner Life 's products visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
That is an excellent question ! These days , everybody searches on the internet for things , and you could do that for insurance , but I would n't , and here 's why . Most internet sites are going to give you a `` quick quote '' , based upon the best case scenario . In a great many cases , that `` best rate '' wo n't in truth apply . It 's legal , because it COULD apply , but misleads many people to believe that would be their price . I seriously recommend that you search the internet for local independent agents , and then talk to a couple of them personally . Once they know a little bit about you , they can give you pretty accurate quotes from several companies , and let you see the differences between them . You want this person to be someone that you form a relationship with , to be there for you when there is trouble , and I 'm not sure an internet site can do that as well as a live body can . Give that a try , okay ? Thanks for asking !
I love this question ! The answer is found all over the internet . Yes , the same internet that you used to buy insurance . Look at the reviews on Yelp and others to see what kind of feedback -LRB- complaints -RRB- people are posting . The moment you begin to choose your insurance based solely on the price , you 'll begin to run into problems . Claims not handled to your satisfaction and the inability to get anyone on this continent to talk to you about it . You may save a few bucks when you purchase your insurance but you 'll lose in the long run . A good agent does something a website can never do ... care . If you have a problem with the way my company handles a claim you can walk right into my office and talk with me , and I 'll listen and do whatever I can to make you happy . I 'm accountable for the services that I provide . Flo or the Gecko will try to sell you on the idea that all insurance is the same and the price is the only thing that matters . Nothing could be further from the truth . Will Flo tell you that you 're grossly underinsured and , god forbid , you get sued , you could be paying for the rest of your life ? Nope . But a good agent will , and it probably would n't cost that much more . The internet has n't made the insurance agent obsolete . On the contrary , it proves why you need a good one . Insurance is n't a simple point and click product . There are many different aspects that fit together to make it work for you , and it 's different for everyone . I 've never had a client tell me I 'm overcharging them after we 've rebuilt their home . Will the lizard show up at your home at 2am when your house is still burning ? I have , it 's what I owe my clients . There are bad agents out there , I 'll admit . I 've met quite a few . However , most good agents take their responsibility seriously and they truly care about their clients . So , in summary , agents are necessary only if you want someone who cares about covering your family correctly .
You are obviously comfortable with the internet , so buying life insurance from an internet website is a good place to start . You can look at quotes instantly on some sites , and input different face amounts and policy types to see how that affects rates . By calling that agency , you will be more certain to get an accurate quote based on your specific health . One internet agency can also shop multiple companies to find you your lowest price .
You can get life insurance at a life insurance agency in a building , you can call a life insurance agency and ask for an agent to come to your home , or you can get life insurance on the internet . Even if just on the phone , it is to your advantage to purchase a policy after talking to an agent . That way you can go over the health questions to make sure you qualify for the policy you apply for , and will be much more likely to be approved and get your best possible rate . Having a lot of options to choose from is also helpful in getting affordable life insurance .
While the actual mechanics of comparing homeowner 's policies involves getting quotes from various carriers , the essential question is where are you going to get the information . You can get it on the internet , newspaper , direct mail or from an insurance agent . The policies will perform in a similar manner regardless of which insurance company you choose , the problem comes in selecting the correct coverages . When you are on the internet it is difficult to understand water back-up , or law and ordinance coverages . It is also difficult to understand what is n't being covered and that lack of knowledgecould be your biggest exposure . Most people just do n't know , hopefully your insurance agent does .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
You can shop for long term disability insurance over the internet , phone , or by going to an office that sells disability insurance products . A good place to find an agent would be to read answers from agents answering disability insurance questions on this website . I would ask them if they sell with more than one company , so that you do n't have to visit multiple websites to get a variety of quotes . They will need to ask you health and occupation questions in order to match you up with a product you can qualify for , and to get you the best price .
That is a great question ! The best thing to do is do a little homework , and then hit the internet . By homework , I mean do two things - first , have an idea of what value you want to insure . Know that value of the home , and search for a program online -LRB- there are several -RRB- that will help you appraise the approximate value of your belongings . Include everything that you might have to replace , should disaster strike . Secondly , ask everyone that you know who they use , what kind of customer service they 've received , and how they like the company , and if they will tell you , approximately what they pay . Then hit the internet , and start looking at companies and agents near you , or that were recommended . Get several quotes , and then choose from those . Remember that often getting coverage from your life or auto insurance company can result in substantial discounts on all of those policies . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
That 's a great question ! You google `` local independent insurance agents '' . Then work your way down the list until you find one you like . I am not a fan of trusting my financial future or the protection of my family to anyone that I do n't know . If I have a problem , I want to know the person that will handle it , and who will be returning my call . I also know that internet sites are set up to give you `` best case '' prices when you shop , that can turn out to be different in reality . A live agent can give you an exact premium price , and details on any reasons why there might be difficulties in getting the best rate . I also am leery of hackers getting all of my information , and am not a fan of putting it out there in the cloud for the picking . There are a lot of things that are good to buy on the internet , but in my opinion , life insurance is n't one of them . Thanks for asking !
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Most new life insurance agents are taught to prospect by first contacting their friends and relatives . That is the traditional way of prospecting for clients . Then you go on to holding seminars , advertising , going door to door , etc. . As an online life insurance agent for 12 years , I have found -LRB- after much trial and error -RRB- , that if you want direct marketing to be your forte , then work as hard as you can to develop internet leads , and do n't put a lot of time into traditional prospecting . That being said , you can not count on one lead source , as things can happen to sabotage it . So you must have leads available to purchase , in addition to those you develop yourself through your website , internet advertising , etc. .
Since you are internet savvy , one good place to find a good life insurance agent is on the internet . Obviously , reading answers by agents on this website will help you find some very good life insurance agents . When you visit life insurance websites , look for icons -LRB- such as TRUSTe -RRB- that show that the site is secure . Look for testimonials that sound genuine and not canned . You can check to see if the insurance agency , or the agency he/she represents , has complaints against them . Finally , interview agents to see if you are comfortable with sharing your personal information with them , and feel that they are being honest with you . That trust is crucial when purchasing something as sensitive and important as life insurance .
There are a few agents making 7 figures . Many more struggling below $ 50,000 . How much you can make will of course vary by factors like your drive , market focus and skill . Less now than in the past but where you live and work could have a big impact on how much you make . The internet has changed that some . Your gross income is also going to be different than your net income depending on your business model . Some agents rely on purchased leads some rely on a heavy internet presents . Both methods have high cost . Others may call or door knock a list which is going to have minimal cost . Many established agents have a large client base that they service and get referrals from . So while an agent may have a large gross income , depending on business cost , that agent could very easily net much less than the guy with a much smaller gross .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Do I Know How Much Renters Insurance I Need ?
Renters Insurance typically provides coverage for personal property/contents and for liability -LRB- including medical payments -RRB- . The higher the liability and medical payments coverage limits you choose , the better . These days lawsuits are all too common and having high liability limits will help protect you . As far as contents/personal property coverage goes ; all of your , `` stuff , '' has value . Add up what you think it is all worth and that amount should be your limit . Let 's say you rent an apartment , imagine flipping the building upside down and shaking it.Everything that falls out of your apartment is what you should assign a value to.This can be an estimate , you do n't need to go overboard searching through receipts . Typical renters policies I issuecontain $ 15,000-30 ,000 of contents/personal property coverage.Of course the values vary drastically depending on if you are for example , a college student or a50 year old CEO who rents .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best way to think about it is , to imagine that your unit has been gutted by a fire . You have lost everything that you own . How much money will you want ? If you take pictures of your unit you will know what you had . If you estimated the replacement cost for each item , you would know how much you would want . I suggest that number guide you in selecting a renters policy . If a process server appears at your door with a lawsuit , how much back up do you want ? I suggest you take as much liability coverage as the insurance company offers .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Does Federal Government Offer Short Term Disability Insurance ?
The federal government does not offer short term disability . Government workers do not have a directly sponsoredprogramthat they are automatically enrolled in . They can purchase private coverage . There are several private companies that allow government workers to purchase group policies and pay for them with a deduction initiated through the worker 's pay center . The federal government supports social security disability for private workers , but this program does not cover temporary disabilities . Your disability must be expected to last twelve months or longer , or result in death .
The federal government does not offer short term disability . Government workers do not have a directly sponsoredprogramthat they are automatically enrolled in . They can purchase private coverage . There are several private companies that allow government workers to purchase group policies and pay for them with a deduction initiated through the worker 's pay center . The federal government supports social security disability for private workers , but this program does not cover temporary disabilities . Your disability must be expected to last twelve months or longer , or result in death .
The argument being made for the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- being unconstitutional essentially boils down to whether the United States Constitution gives the Federal Government the legal authority to compel citizens to purchase a product or service . The powers of what the Federal Government can do are -LRB- supposedly -RRB- strictly defined in the U.S. constitution with all other powers not granted to the Federal Government being granted to the individual states . There is also the issue of whether the Federal Government under its authority to regulate interstate commerce can coerce a citizen into engaging in an economic activity within the confines of their own state . This is where the argument regarding the `` individual mandate '' comes into play . Can the Federal Government penalize someone for not engaging in an economic activity , in this case refusing to purchase health insurance ? I would refer you to the United States Constitution -LRB- It 's a surprisingly short read -RRB- to make your own judgment as to whether the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is in compliance with our government 's owner 's manual .
Federal Disability Insurance may be a reference to Federal Employee Disability Insurance . If so , it is private disability coverage that can be purchased by federal employees to supplement the federally provided plans , FERS and CSRS . Or Federal Disability Insurance may be referring to Social Security Disability benefits paid to qualified disabled persons by the federal government .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
When changing jobs , deciding how to address your health insurance needs in the gap period between employer sponsored health insurance plans is both simpler and more complicated than ever before . The size of the employer group you are leaving will impact on your planning as well . If your employer has less than 20 employees then state continuation of coverage provisions will apply , these vary from state to state but they are usually for shorter periods of time than the Federal COBRA law requires . Employers with 20 + employees are subject to the Federal COBRA guidelines where most employees can continue their coverage for up to 18-months . Your continuation of coverage options to consider now in 2014 are ; 1 -RRB- Continuation of Coverage through Your Existing Employer 's Health Plan - you will need to notify your former employer of your intention to continue your coverage under their group plan within 63-days of your last day of employment . You must make premium payments in full and remit them in a timely manner to your former employer -LRB- or their administrator -RRB- each month to keep your coverage in effect . 2 -RRB- Short Term Medical Insurance - if you are healthy and pre-existing condition issues are not a personal concern and if you are confident that you will be obtaining new employment with benefits in the next several weeks to months then Short Term Major Medical Insurance may be an alternative to consider . Just because you can continue with your former employer 's coverage does not mean you are required to or that you will find it affordable . Short Term Medical plans are often far less expensive than group health insurance plans and in some cases may even offer you more coverage than your employer 's plan . A note of caution : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the minimum coverage requirements under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- so a person covered by such a policy may find themselves subject to the individual mandate tax penalty for the period of the year they are insured under such plans . 3 -RRB- Obtain Individual Major Medical Insurance - maybe your prospects for being quickly hired somewhere else are not strong at this time or perhaps you are considering taking a new career path -LRB- e.g - consultant , freelancer , contractor -RRB- , having health insurance independent of your employer may be the best solution . In this event you will want to explore your health insurance plan options both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplaces and whether you would qualify for any premium tax subsidies . 4 -RRB- Qualification for Medicaid/CHIP , etc. - depending upon your income level and/or other life circumstances you may have to explore your coverage options under various state and/or Federal health benefit plans for you and/or your dependents . 5 -RRB- Go Without Coverage - not my recommendation but it is an option and an option than no small number of people choose each year . Considering the potential financial risk of an uninsured illness or injury this is really only an option of last resort and a person faced with such a situation should pursue their government coverage options if possible . That should pretty well cover all the possible ways to address your coverage needs between jobs .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
Up until recently , federal employees were not offered short term disability or long term disability insurance . If a federal employee was disabled for over a year and met the length of employment guidelines , they could take advantage of a disability retirement program . However , federal employees are now offered a choice of disability plans through FedAdvantage to fill in the gaps in their federal benefits .
Does Washington state tax life insurance benefits ? Short answer `` yes '' in some situations . Washington state does have their own version of estate taxes , just like the federal government does . The threshold is much lower than the Federal level and the highest bracket is much lower than the Federal standard . To reduce or minimize the impact of ownership of a life policy if someone is in that higher asset bracket , a life insurance trust should be considered to help in this area .
State disability insurance is a government mandated program that many people mistakenly believe they have , but do n't . Only five states require private workers to participate in a short term disability program : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . Forty five states do not have mandated state short term disability . Social Security Disability Insurance is managed at the state level , but is a federally funded program . Temporary disabilities are not covered .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
Boy , what a question . For me , it gets to the root of what is wrong with government these days . Im going to speak bluntly because I feel very strongly about this issue . Even though I sell life insurance for a living , I have had extensive experience in the medical insurance marketplace . I am also a consumer , and have to buy the product for myself and my family . And , I am a patriotic American who wants to see our country run the way it should be . Everybody needs medical care . If the insurance marketplace is left to run by its own devices , the vast majority of people will end up with a product that they like , at a price they can afford . If a small minority of people end up without coverage for whatever reason , their needs can be easily addressed . This could take place with a government safety net , an innovation by private companies , or some combination of the above . Either way , everyone will be able to have some form of coverage so that the cost of getting medical attention could be kept affordable . Beyond making sure that healthcare products and services are safe and secure , I cant see why government invention would be needed at all to make this system work . Next point : nobody is entitled to medical insurance . Frankly , nobody is entitled to anything . A government should not be in the business of providing the stuff to which we think we are entitled . The whole notion of government taking care of you from cradle-to-grave is horribly misguided . A gargantuan state and federal bureaucracy can in no way give each and every man , woman and child the treatment they deserve every day of their life . Last point : giving this gargantuan bureaucracy the legal power to force you to do business with it is a travesty of justice . We have made a horrible mistake by giving the federal government the right to tax or penalize us when purchasing health insurance . We have let it get much too cozy with the corporate providers of healthcare . Who exactly is benefiting by this illicit partnership ? Is it you ? Is it me ? Do we actually have the health insurance we need at a price we can afford ? Many Americans do not . So the answer to your question is yes , the United States government can force you to buy health insurance , and we have nobody to blame but ourselves for this sorry state of affairs .
The federal government does not directly provide disability coverage to its employees . There are very generous sick leave policies , but not true disability . There are a variety of private insurance carriers that sell to federal government employees indirectly . Some allow union members to purchase policies as a member benefit . Others have group plans that allow you to fund premiums directly from PayCenter and Postalease allottments .
The Federal Government provides Social Security Disability for people who worked and paid into the system , and have a disability that is expected to last for twelve months or longer , or result in death . Certain people born with a disability may be eligible to receive benefits after age eighteen . Only private companies offer long term disability insurance for purchase . These policies may pay larger benefit amounts , for a wider array of disabling conditions than does Social Security Disability .
There is no need to `` fix '' long-term care insurance because it is not broken . However , our current system of how we as a societyassist the growing number of elderly who may have no one to take care of them is in need of serious repair . Right now , if one can not afford the cost of long-term care , they must become `` indigent '' , that is to say , have less that about $ 2,000 in liquid assets and make less than $ 35/mo . -LRB- those numbers are adjusted annually and may not be accurate -RRB- . Assets excluded from the equation are one 's house , one 's car , and approximately $ 91,000 in savings or checking for spousal support . If you have more than that you have to `` spend down '' in order to qualify for government assistance -LRB- Medicaid - in CA , Medical -RRB- . The problem is thatthose programs are not well-funded and may not have sufficient funds when the current baby-boomer demographic hits the age when many will need expensive long-term care . The private sector provides a solution to this problem in selling long-term care insurance to the general public . However , while highly valuable , it is also highly priced . In fact , the middle class , for which it was originally designed to help , have been priced out of the market . Agents are challenged to come up with coverage that middle class folk can afford . The state and federal government 's solution is Medicaid . However , without reform , Medicaid - a partnership between the federal government and the states - will likely run out of money within the next 10-15 years . No one wants that to happen , but no one is doing anything about it right now . A congressional commission has been meeting since the beginning of summer 2013 on the matter of long-term care and should be coming out soon with recommendations for confronting the problem of how we help our elderly die with dignity .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The PPACA , or better known to the public as Obamacare , will be implemented six months from now . The intent of the legislation is to provide health coverage for every American at an affordable price , supposedly lowering current premiums . Most economists and some government agencies predict that Obamacare will cost much more to operate than previously thought and will impact the economy adversely . Keep in mind that this is a federal program . Any short fall of the program will be borne by federal income tax payers . Only 53 % of Americans pay federal income taxes . Taxes will increase or the U.S. debt will increase or both with the imposition of Obamacare .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Long Does It Take To Process A Renters Insurance Claim ?
The insurance company wants to settle the claim as quickly as you . The holdup is always determining the amount of loss . The claim is completed when you and the insurance company agree on that figure . Then the company can pay you what is owed . Of course , you understand that there is sometime difficulty in establishing those amounts .
Most insurance companies are able to open a claim very quickly and then promise to contact you usually within 24 hours of your reporting . If it is a fairly straight forward and less serious loss , the claims professional might be able to issue you at least a preliminary check on the spot . Naturally , more complicated and extensive claims may take longer to completely settle .
Oh wow , unfortunately there is no black and white answer to this question . It varies drastically from carrier to carrier but also from claim to claim . Your actual claim will determine a lot about how long the process will take to full resolution . If it is a simple `` fender bender '' where things are pretty cut and dry , you are talking a matter of a couple of days ... with our carriers and on claims like this as soon as the field adjustor can get out to inspect the car , they are usually cutting a check on the spot . If seen claims like this close in a day , but also have seem them take a couple of days to close simply due to scheduling issues . More serious claims take longer . If fault is in questions and police reports have to be pulled , this takes time . If there are serious injuries or death , these take a lot of time . Typically you do n't have to wait until the claim is settled to start the repairs on your vehicle . If you car is `` totaled '' you might have to wait until it is settled . Each claim and carrrier is different and you have the right to stay informed about the process . Your adjustor will no more than your agent so stay in contact with them and ask them direct questions about the length of time things should take and what you should expect during the process . Contact your local independent agent and ask them specifics on the claims process of their carriers .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
I assume you are referring to a claim investigation . This can verywidely The goal of the insurance carrier is toinvestigateand come to a determination as quickly as possible but here are factors that can slow down the process . Getting a police report . Police reports can take 10 and up to 30 days to obtain . There really is no way to speed this up as the insurance carrier is at the mercy of the policy department . Contacting the other party for a statement . Many times the other party involved in the claim can be unresponsive further slowing down the process . Were there witnesses who need to be interviewed . These are again details that can slow the process down . There are simple claims that canresolvedquickly with out all these other steps but for the more complicated claims , He said She said , further investigation takes place and you can be looking at 60 days in some cases . All this is merely for determining fault . Keep in mind if you havecollisioncoverage on your vehicle a claim investigation will not hinder getting your carrepaired . You just have to meet your deductible . This is always good to talk to your local agent about this process as the agent can better handle explaining the process then the claims adjusters .
If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a renter 's loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Renter 's '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you as the insured must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value.Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52 inch HD TV when it was actually an 18 inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed .
Most claims are paid within a few hours to a few days with many carriers . There are many factors that will decide how long a claim takes to process . A few of those factors are : the amount of the claim , the type of claim , the availability of police reports or other supporting documents , just to name a few . If you feel a claim is taking longer than it should to be processed contact your local agent and express your concern so that they can help you gain some insight as to when the claim is expected to achieve completion .
Life Insurance underwriting takes as long as it takes the life insurance underwriter to collect all the data needed to approve your policy . If you apply for a policy that does not need any exam or medical records , the process may take less than 24 hours . If they do not require an exam but can order medical records , it will take as long as it takes you or your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- to provide those records . If they require an exam , you will not be approved until at least 3 days after you take the exam . In other words , the faster you and your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- respond to the underwriter 's requests , the shorter the time it generally takes for your policy to be approved . However , things can get held up if life insurance companies get behind , the paramed examiner will not work with you to set up your exam , your doctor 's office is slow to provide your medical records to the life insurance company , and/or additional medical records must be ordered weeks or months into the process . Above all , a good Case Manager who regularly communicates with you and the insurance company can shave time off the underwriting process . Using an agency that has great customer service may not only help speed things up , it may be the key to getting your life insurance put into effect , period .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
They CAN take a long time . The good ones build their reputation on settling claims as quickly as possible . Most wo n't start a claim until they have recieved a certified death certificate and claim form . The majority will pay within 30-days of receiving that . There are some that make a sport out of dragging on the claims process . The longest I 've personally seen was 8-months and about 6 of those 8-months was because they had n't had time to look at it yet . It was inexcusable . The very best will pay the claim within 24-hours of death with no death certificate needed . The claims process does n't get any better than that . If the death occurs with in the first 2-years it will be contestable and that will slow down the process . But it should still be within 2months .
To file a renter 's insurance claim , you would , of course , need to be insured under an active policy . You should also verify that it is a claim that is likely to be covered . Your broker or agent that sold you the policy can discuss that with you . The process does not take long and a payment will be processed quickly .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Metlife does not offer an expected time frame for processing a life insurance claim on any of their death claim materials . They do try to offer explanations that will avoid certain situations to hang up claim processing . Most life insurance claims take from a couple weeks to a couple of months to process .
Typically you contact your renters insurance carrier 's claims department directly or contact your local agent , they will gather the information necessary to process your claim based on your policy 's coverage . This process is typically quick and relatively painless . It may involve a representative from your insurance carrier coming to your premise to take pictures or gather other information as needed to process your claim .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
To make a claim on your renters insurance , you would contact the claims phone number of your renters insurance carrier . The phone number is typically listed within your policy documents or you can call your local agent to have them help you with the claims process . Your local agent is there to assist you during the claims process .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
When you need to file a Homeowners Insurance Claim , the best and quickest way to handle it is to call the CLAIMS Telephone number listed on your Homeowners Insurance declarations page . Most carriers have a 24 Hour reporting line for claims ; the station is staffed by an individual trained to take an initial report and pass it on to the assigned claims adjustor based on the type of claim and geographical location of the loss . Once the preliminary report is taken , a claims number is assigned , an adjustor is assigned and the preliminary record is report to the National Database also known as CLUE ; CLUE is a tool used industry wide to review prior claims activity on homes . The CLUE report will later be updated eventual showing the Closed Status and total amount paid by the insurance carrier to resolve the claim . When making the initial claim report , it is beneficial to only offer a simple and general explanation of the nature of the loss ; it is always better to give all the details directly to the claims adjustor as the initial claims report is usually not taken by a person licensed and trained with the capabilities of the insurance adjustor.In most cases , the insurance carrier will assign and adjustor who will make an initial contact within 1 business day . The adjustor will make an appointment to come out and review the damages claimed , a detailed estimate of the required repairs will be prepared and the adjustor willinterpret the policy to determine if and to what extent coverage applies to the damage incurred ; the final process will be a resolution letter mailed to the insured with a full accounting of the situation and perhaps an associated check for repairs . In some cases , an initial payment may be offered holding back thedepreciated portion of the loss until thedamages or items are replaced after which the carrier will reimburse the insured for the full replacement cost of the items as long as the policy coverseverything on a replacement cost basis . Any specificquestions regarding a loss should be directly discussed with the claims adjustorwho is licensed and responsible to handle the complete transaction and explain the processto the insured . Prior to any claim occurrence , it may alsobe a good idea to contact a licensed insurance representative to learn the process and best recommended method of handling thesituation should youencounter a claim .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Should I Talk To About Life Insurance ?
You should interview independent life insurance agents or life insurance licensed registered representatives . Career agents may have access to life insurance products through brokerage outlets , but they generally attempt to sell their proprietary products , which rarely are competitive in the brokerage market place . Vetting the right adviser is part of your financial plan , so plan wisely with the right planner .
Find a good local experienced independent agent in your area who can sit down with you , discuss your needs and goals and help you find the plan that is affordable for you . Do not bow to high pressure sales tactics . Find someone you are comfortable with . You may want to interview a few agents before deciding on the one you want to do business with . A good agent will be looking out for YOUR interests . Find someone who has been in the business for a while , who knows the plans and options available to you .
For sure , it is a simple procedure . Call up your insurance company and ask for the right form . There you go . But : as with any major decision , you should first assemble a team of advisers and make sure all bases are covered the way they should be . You do not want this move to backfire on you . First of all , talk with the beneficiary of the policy . Once you cash it in , there will be no survivor benefit . Nothing . Is that OK ? Are you self-insuring with some other liquid funds ? Will the exact amount of money needed be there when it is needed ? All cash needs met ? Debts can be paid off ? How about money for the future ? Kids will be OK ? Grandkids ? Your business ? Charitable gifts taken care of ? Lots to think about before you wipe out the death benefit . Then talk with your insurance broker . Talk about the possibility of your getting coverage later , should you need it again . What would the pricing be like ? Of course , you should be given only the most general of answers . You will be older , so the price , of course , would be higher ... ... assuming that you are insurable . And your broker should make it clear in no uncertain terms that you may unfortunately not be eligible for coverage at a later point . You may have a serious medical condition . You may take up an adventurous hobby . You may have a job that requires travel to hazardous places . Any number of changes could take place that would disqualify you for coverage , or drive the price up . A lot . Dont forget that . Dont take your insurability for granted . It is not prudent to assume you will be able to easily pick up a cheap policy . You should also talk with your accountant or tax advisor . Depending on how you have funded your life insurance policy , all or a portion of the surrender value may be taxable . You need to know that before you accept the check . You do not want to get hit with an unexpected tax bill , especially if you have counted on all the money for a specific purpose . There you go . Surrendering your life insurance is as simple as completing a form . But it really is not so simple .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
First of all , I need to stress that you should talk to an estate planning attorney about this topic . We life insurance guys know our way around the block here , but frankly , you should talk to an expert . Same as anything else where you need the best advice possible . Make sure it is an attorney who does specialize in estate planning . Real estate attorneys have their own area of expertise , as do commercial attorneys . Talk to somebody who knows the ins and outs of estate taxation . But , I can talk in generalities . If you own your life insurance , it would be included in your estate . If your spouse owns it , it would be included in his or her estate . Does any of this matter ? It does if you want to avoid or minimize estate taxation when your estate is settled . This means keeping both the state and federal tax people out of the picture to the greatest extent possible . How can you do this ? Well , since the ownership of assets is the key trigger in determining into whose estate money falls , then you can be creative with the ownership designation of your policy . It could be a trust . It could be another relative , such as an adult child . It could be your business . How do you make this decision ? This is where you talk with your estate planning legal expert and explore the ramifications of each choice . Taxation is not your only concern . There are issues related to control of assets as well . With the right guidance , you can put together a plan that gets the job done .
First I 'd like to say that your question , `` Do I need life insurance now that I 'm getting married '' is a mature question that indicates you genuinely care about your future wife and family and are an intelligent thinker ! Good on ya ! The answer to whether you need insurance or not really relies on your financial strength and goals . If you have a few million dollars in liquid assets you probably do n't NEED insurance ... but you may still WANT to have Whole Life , Cash Value life insurance . The wealthiest people in the world typically are the biggest buyers of WL insurance , because of the value it has . On the other hand there are many people who are self insured feeling that the money they have acquired is sufficient to cover the needs of their family in the event of their demise . Obviously those people do n't know what the wealthiest people know about WL insurance . So in order to determine what kind of life insurance you should consider , -LRB- there are over 10 different kinds of life insurance -RRB- , and how much is appropriate , you should consult with a life insurance professional - preferably one who is not tied to just one provider and can help you to implement the program that will be the best for you . If you would like to talk about this further you can call or email me . I 'm only licensed in Hawaii , but I 'm happy to help you with the more important questions .
Whole Life Insurance has many great aspects but using it as a retirement investment is not one of them . There are some companies that are promoting a concept of using your whole life insurance as your personal bank , instead of getting a loan from a bank to buy something use the cash value of your life insurance and then pay yourself back . But when it comes to retirement a whole life policy will not give you the gains needed to fund your retirement . When you look at your retirement saving , whether its your 401K that we are talking about or youre personal saving . Your financial planner should be telling you that you can only talk out about 5 % of the value per year otherwise you may run out of money . Think about that , if you have $ 100,000 in a 401k that will give you a yearly income of only $ 5,000 . If you are looking for options to protect yourself against premature loss and has additional income options for retirement then you should really look at index universal life . A 45yr old male non-smoker could invest $ 150 per month into a $ 100,000 life insurance policy and when he retires at 65 , he should be receiving about $ 6,000 of yearly income , most of which is tax free . This is a great option for most individuals , if you need more help or have additional questions please feel free to contact me .
This is a pretty big and a bit vague . I will assume you are talking about becoming an agent or broker marketing life insurance . When I have brokers who connect to me from just passing their licensing exams , the only focus is how to begin marketing . Let 's face it , if you have no one to market to , then you are out of business before you start . Many agencies will talk to you about what I refer to as your Project 100 . This is all the people you personally have connections to such as your family -LRB- parents , brothers , sisters , aunts , uncles , grandparents and on and on -RRB- , then your doctor , dentist , neighbors and on and on . These people are good to perhaps get some practicing in but what happens after you talk to all of them ? Many agents end up leaving this profession after they have exhausted your Project 100 because you have not learned how to market to others . What niche are you going to focus on , etc. . Put together a business plan , find a mentor who can help you with objections , marketing ideas , advanced sales which life insurance can be used for and identify your market . Now you are off to a good start . I hope this is what you are looking for with your question .
I had to do a little research on this guy . Looks like he has a radio show talking about Financial Services and everything in between . With some digging , I found this statement on his website : Life insurance is meant to replace your income . My rule of thumb is to buy an amount equal to 10 times your annual salary . His website is : WEBSITELINK where I found the answer . On that note , realize he is saying `` a rule of thumb '' which I tend to agree with by the way if I am just casually talking to someone about Life Insurance and how much you need . I do prefer to get into specifics with your situation , which any agent/broker should do for you , to determine what you need to cover like your biggest deb , your mortgage to replacing income and for how long . A thought is to replace income to retirement age -LRB- age 65 , 70 , etc. -RRB- as at this time , you do not earn income any more . Hope this helps . Please consider talking to a local agent or feel free to reach out to me .
can life insurance be used as an investment ? Yes , it can . Life insurance has been used as an investment for hundreds of years . While there are some who try very hard to tell you why it 's not an investment , they always seem to never get around to talking about RISK and how there are different levels of risk with different types of investment . Usually , when beating up life insurance , a equity is used with a hypothetical 12 % return on the equity . They never talk about Risk and what role it plays in an investment . Choice A pays 5 % return steady over time , chugs along never goes backward , even in a down marketand has a .001 % chance of failure . Choice B can pay 30 % return in any given year or lose 30 % in any given year . It can go backwards , it can double extremely fast and it has a much higher potential for failure . Which should you own ? How about Both ? One is a safety net which allows you to accept more risk with another choice which can reward you for your efforts . However if it fails to live up to it 's potential , the other safer route keeps you from losing everything . So yes , life insurance can be used as an investment , should it be your only choice ? no , not really , no more than straight equities should be either . Hope this makes sense .
Without knowing more about you , it is impossible to know whether you should get Term Life Insurance . The type of life insurance you should get , or whether you should get life insurance at all , is best determined in a consultation with an experienced agent who can help fit the product to your needs and budget . This can be done in person , over the phone , or even by email . But one size does not necessarily fit all , and talking over your situation with someone who can help you sort through the thousands of products can be extremely helpful . Generally speaking , though , there are two main characteristics of someone who should buy Term Life : they needa lot of coverage for the least possible cost now , and they will not need as much -LRB- or any -RRB- life insurance in the distant future .
I love this question ! The answer is found all over the internet . Yes , the same internet that you used to buy insurance . Look at the reviews on Yelp and others to see what kind of feedback -LRB- complaints -RRB- people are posting . The moment you begin to choose your insurance based solely on the price , you 'll begin to run into problems . Claims not handled to your satisfaction and the inability to get anyone on this continent to talk to you about it . You may save a few bucks when you purchase your insurance but you 'll lose in the long run . A good agent does something a website can never do ... care . If you have a problem with the way my company handles a claim you can walk right into my office and talk with me , and I 'll listen and do whatever I can to make you happy . I 'm accountable for the services that I provide . Flo or the Gecko will try to sell you on the idea that all insurance is the same and the price is the only thing that matters . Nothing could be further from the truth . Will Flo tell you that you 're grossly underinsured and , god forbid , you get sued , you could be paying for the rest of your life ? Nope . But a good agent will , and it probably would n't cost that much more . The internet has n't made the insurance agent obsolete . On the contrary , it proves why you need a good one . Insurance is n't a simple point and click product . There are many different aspects that fit together to make it work for you , and it 's different for everyone . I 've never had a client tell me I 'm overcharging them after we 've rebuilt their home . Will the lizard show up at your home at 2am when your house is still burning ? I have , it 's what I owe my clients . There are bad agents out there , I 'll admit . I 've met quite a few . However , most good agents take their responsibility seriously and they truly care about their clients . So , in summary , agents are necessary only if you want someone who cares about covering your family correctly .
I am certainly not a scholar and can say I do not know the bible like I should however I can safely say the bible does not talk about Life Insurance by that name . There are many versus and scriptures however that talk about managing your money , staying out of debt , lending money , etc. . . There is nothing wrong with taking care of loved ones or your obligations to cover your expenses when you pass away . There are ways you can have to benefit paid out as to prevent or at least minimize what I refer to as the `` lottery syndrome '' which is someone receiving a large sum of monies when they have not earned them . There is no respect for that money and therefor will and has been spent unwisely . If you need more information , I can refer some books for you to read which draw upon scripture and managing your monies .
Generally speaking NO ... virtually all carriers who use any part of an ISO homeowners insurance contract will exclude flood . Flood insurance is underwritten and priced by the government through FEMA . There are several carriers who write flood insurance and there should n't be any real variance to the pricing between the carriers . Even if you do n't think your home or business would ever flood , check out the cost of flood insurance . You might be surprised how cheap it actually is ... I know what I 'm talking about on this topic . My office had 7 feet of water in it after back to back 100 years storms hit my area back in 2010 . I did n't have flood insurance -LRB- dumb agent I know -RRB- and had to come out of pocket to rebuild my unit . I have flood insurance now ... costs me about $ 350 a year !!
Although more information is needed to adequately address this very general question , a few points can be made . I am going to make the assumption that you are talking about physical damage to your vehicle , with no injury . If you are asking about dealing with the person who will physically inspect your vehicle , they or someone on their behalf should first contact you , to set up an inspection at your convenience . This is really an ` appraiser ' of the damages although they may also possess claim settlement authority to settle your claim on-site , in certain non-injury situations . If you are talking about a typical inside claim adjuster , expect a call from them , asking you to provide the details of the accident . After assessing the facts , the adjuster 's job is to make you whole for your loss , depending upon the liability circumstances involved . In both instances , you should expect to be treated with respect whether you are the policyholder or the person whose vehicle was damaged by another party . If you are not pleased with the process , tell the appraiser or adjuster so and then ask to speak to their superior . Hope this helps somewhat but a lot more information is needed to really help you .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , Syndicated Financial Columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question is : is an annuity a good investment ? Well , remember there are several types of annuities . And depending upon which annuity we 're talking about , they 're all deferred annuities that we 're talking about ; and it could be fixed , it could be indexed , it could be variable . Fixed rates would be generally interest rates that are depended on the Treasuries . Most carriers buy Government debentures , and indexing is based on indices both foreign and domestic . And the good thing about that is , is that you have upside potential without any downside risk . Just keep in mind that you do have policy expenses to pay for . Variable annuities are more market-driven and they have exposure to risk , and you could lose your principle . You need to take a risk tolerance test before you get into it . But all three have their place . You have to find out , is this an investment for you ? Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Regardless of the type of car that you drive , the best way to control your insurance costs is to talk to your Insurance Professional about all available discounts and coverage options that are available to you . Talk about various deductibles for both Comprehensive and Collision . Talk about `` bundling '' your personal insurance program because many companies offer nice discounts if you insure your home and car together . Others deepen thse discounts if you also have life insurance or other coverage wit the same company . some companies offer discounts if your car is equipt with an alarm or theft recovery system , while others offer you the chance to have a monitoring chip plugged into your car to see if your driving habits qualify you for reduced rates .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Assuming that you mean due to the replacement of your existing car with another , then yes , coverage would be handled as a transfer replacement on your policy . Otherwise , you would have to buy a new policy every time you bought another vehicle or swapped one for another . It is best to talk with your Insurance Professional about the transaction in order to make sure the transfer of coverage from one car to the other is handled properly and without any un necessary delay . If you are replacing an older car that may not have Collision coverage to a newer car where it is either advisable or required -LRB- by the terms of your loan or lease agreement -RRB- then be sure to talk to your advisor about making sure your revised policy will include all of the required coverage . That is also a great time to talk about any and all available discounts .
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Do You Need To Know About Life Insurance ?
Life Insurance requires an analysis based on future financial needs . its a plan in the event of something sudden and unfortunate . Money is tax free lump sum benefits . You will want to find the lowest rates . The best companies . A professional as myself to guide you to the best coverages . Rates depend on age , health , and other activities . Contact me . I can answer all your concerns and get you best coverages .
That is an excellent question ! There are a couple of things that you should know about life insurance . One is that the price is based on a number of things , such as your age , gender , health , and smoking preference . The younger and healthier , the cheaper , generally . The amount of coverage is also a factor - the higher the policy , the higher the price . The other is that there are basically two types of insurance - term , and whole life . Term lasts for a period of time , and then ends , A whole life policy lasts as long as you do . They each have their advantages , and suited purposes . The best thing that you can do is sit down with an agent and ask them to help you find a policy that is right for you . If you would like to contact me privately , I 'd be happy to help . Thank you for asking !
Everything you need to get started you can find online . Life insurance websites , like QualityTermLife , have information about life insurance types , what to watch out for , needs calculator and quote service that lets you compare prices from dozens of top-rated life companies . This gets you high quality at the lowest , most affordable price . Only when you are ready to buy should you give out your contact information . You will need to speak with an advisor to complete your application , but by that time you should be well-informed enough to get what you need , and not get oversold .
First of all , dont go to websites with life insurance rates . I know everybody likes to do this , but youll never get good information . Why not ? Simply because you need to know the rate class for what you qualify with any given company . How do you really know you qualify for preferred ? Preferred Best ? Standard ? The problem is that the vetting questions used on these websites are never thorough enough to give you a really reliable underwriting classification . Besides , what about all the gray areas that need explanation ? You used to drink heavily , but now you dont . But you stopped only a month ago . Is that long enough to avoid a rated premium ? So what do you do ? You get yourself a broker who will prequalify you . He or she will compile a risk profile about you based on thorough and accurate quote information . He will advocate on your behalf to make sure you receive all the credit you deserve for the risk management and avoidance you are doing . He will present this to selected carriers with a reputation for being competitive for a profile such as yours . Then , when you get numbers from different carriers , they will mean something because you know you really qualify for them .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
First I 'd like to say that your question , `` Do I need life insurance now that I 'm getting married '' is a mature question that indicates you genuinely care about your future wife and family and are an intelligent thinker ! Good on ya ! The answer to whether you need insurance or not really relies on your financial strength and goals . If you have a few million dollars in liquid assets you probably do n't NEED insurance ... but you may still WANT to have Whole Life , Cash Value life insurance . The wealthiest people in the world typically are the biggest buyers of WL insurance , because of the value it has . On the other hand there are many people who are self insured feeling that the money they have acquired is sufficient to cover the needs of their family in the event of their demise . Obviously those people do n't know what the wealthiest people know about WL insurance . So in order to determine what kind of life insurance you should consider , -LRB- there are over 10 different kinds of life insurance -RRB- , and how much is appropriate , you should consult with a life insurance professional - preferably one who is not tied to just one provider and can help you to implement the program that will be the best for you . If you would like to talk about this further you can call or email me . I 'm only licensed in Hawaii , but I 'm happy to help you with the more important questions .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
You know ... I have a friend who works tireless hours to receive government benefits . One may wonder why he does n't get a job ?! Anyways , there are many moving parts in Fixed -LRB- Indexed -RRB- Annuities . -LRB- FA -RRB- But ` Do they work ' is a tad broad . Here are a few questions you may want to know , before moving forward with a FA : - Why are you thinking about a FA ? - What do you wish to accomplish ? - Do you need income now , later , forever -LRB- so long as you shall live -RRB- - with a spouse , or it for something else ? - Is liquidity -LRB- without penalty -RRB- an immediate concern ? - Is long term growth with protection of principal your primary goal ? Get where I 'm going with this ? In the world of FAs , there are many moving parts and many options . Did you know that Texas and Florida are the only two states in the US that have added protective benefits , built into annuities ? Point being , a good Agent / Advisor will take the time to do a thorough needs analysis to determine what you seek , if a FA suits your needs and if applicable show you two or three options and let you choose what YOU believe is best for you . Just my two-cents !
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Could be . Just make sure you know what youre gaining , and what youre losing . What if you sell it , and then need coverage again ? Would you be eligible , considering your medical condition and lifestyle ? Of course , you do understand the price would be higher simply because youre older than when you had taken out that policy originally . What about the cash value of the policy ? That might be higher than the selling price . Think about that . Do your research . Also remember that with whole life insurance , you would be parting with a product that gives just about the best guarantees around . Guaranteed premium . Guaranteed death benefit . And guaranteed cash value . Take a quick survey of the marketplace and see if any of other product gives you a better rate of return on the guaranteed cash . Having said all this , if you are dead set on selling the policy , you have to find a good settlement company with whom to do business . They are a dime a dozen . Get a referral to some good ones . Interview them . Let them compete for your business . What is the most one would pay ? You should know that they will underwrite you . Your age and medical condition are key . They will not take all comers . Older , and frankly sicker , insureds are their preference . You may not even be eligible . If that is the case , look again at your life insurance options . You might be able to get better value from a guaranteed universal life product . Would you like to keep learning ? Check my blog : planrisklive.com .
To issue a homeowners policy , the company will need a great deal of information . They will need information about the fire protection where the home is located . They will need to know the size and construction of the home . They want to know how close the home is to a body of water . They will need to know what pets are on the property . They will need to know the condition of the home , in particular , the roof . Most insurers require photographs of the home .
You know , there really is a right way to answer this question . I think the right way is to do whats best for you as the beneficiary . Life insurance is , after all , a care package from the insured to his loved one . It is a way of saying , I love you , and I take care of you now . Im going to make sure that an insurance company takes care of you later . This means that the golden rule is this : the quality of life you have now , is the quality of life you should have if you suffer the tragic loss of your spouse . If you are not making do with less now , you should not have to make do with less later . The money you need to pay your monthly bills now , is the amount of money you should have to pay your monthly bills later . The larger question is : for how long do you need this benefit to last ? For how long do you want to live off the insurance money ? There are a number of factors involved in that decision . First , and most important , is buying yourself the time needed to grieve and move on . Think about it . You have dedicated yourself to a life with someone . Now he is not there . And will not return . How long will it tell you to get back on your own two feet and renew your life ? Two years ? Five years ? Longer ? Then , what about your kids ? Theyve already lost one of their parents . Forever . They will need you more than ever . They will need you to spend as much time with them as possible . Can you afford to do this ? Life insurance can make sure the answer is yes .
There is no one best life insurance for everyone . Different products are created for different needs , and different companies design products for different types of clients . Even different financial professionals have different impressions about what type of life insurance to get , based on how they see it plugging into your overall portfolio . It sounds confusing , but when you have a conversation with a life insurance agent who is watching out for your best interests , what you need becomes clear . Sometimes your best policy is determined by the limited choices you may have due to your age or health . Sometimes your budget steers you to your best life insurance . This may sound like a vague answer , but that is only because life insurance is designed for different niches . Until I know your need , I can not know how to answer correctly . But once I do know that , you may find choices and prices you never thought possible .
To know the best type of life insurance for you , I 'd need to know some things about you . 1 -RRB- Above all , what are your needs for your life insurance ? Do you want a small policy to use for your funeral and other final expenses ? Do you want a policy that would get your three teenagers established if something happened to you ? The best life insurance for those two scenarios are very different . Discerning your purpose for your life insurance helps professionals such as myself figure out the best type and amount of coverage you need . 2 -RRB- How old are you ? Do you have any health problems ? Do you smoke ? Questions such as this give us the tools to find your best rate . 3 -RRB- What is available for you ? This is a questions we agents must answer . Some life insurance agents carry one brand of life insurance , others offer policies from scores of companies . Some agents will push one type of policy on you , others will hunt around for your best option , even if they have to refer you elsewhere . You can save a lot of time and frustration by starting with an agency who will go the extra mile to find your best type of life insurance , right from the start .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
I presume from your question that you must be a health care provider or supply some type of service and/or product that is reimbursable under health insurance plans . First , you need to determine the competitive environment for your product or service in your marketplace . If you have lots of competition your negotiating position will not be as strong -LRB- perhaps nonexistent -RRB- as if there is limited competition for your product or service in your marketplace . The insurance company will know the answer to this question from their perspective so you need to know the answer too before engaging in discussions with insurance carriers . Know what the absolute minimum is that you can accept as payment for your product or service . In today 's environment cost is the main driver in provider contracting , any insurance carrier is going to want the lowest possible cost from any provider/vendor they contract with . What they want to pay could well be below your cost of providing the service . You will have to make a business decision if such an arrangement would make business sense in the overall context of your total business model . What is your unique selling proposition ? What do you offer that a competitor or other product does not provide or provide as well ? Do you offer a qualitative advantage , a price advantage , or both ? They are going to ask you these questions and expect you to prove it so be prepared . Do research on the insurance carriers . Does your target market align with theirs ? If your focus is on infant care calling on an insurance carrier who is more focused on the senior marketplace is obviously a waste of everyone 's time . Even among health insurance carriers that from the outside seem to be competing for the same market segment you will find upon closer examination that they all have their areas of market strengths and weaknesses and marketplace segments they focus on . Some are more oriented towards individual and small group health insurance while others really shine in the large group space . Knowing this in advance and knowing what your capabilities are will allow you to focus on the prospective carriers best aligned with the marketplace that is also the best fit for your product or service . Once you have these basics understood you can begin contacting the various insurance carriers and ask to be put in touch with the department and/or person who handles the insurance carrier 's provider contracting and you can let the games begin .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Pay For Circumcision ?
Most likely Medicare will not pay for circumcision.Very few circumcisions are performed on adults . Medicare covers people over the age of 65 . Many health insurance plans will not cover ritual circumcision . It is viewed as an elective procedure . Some plans will cover the procedure if deemed medically necessary . A greater percentage of claims are paid when there is a medical diagnosis such as phimosis .
Since Medicare covers people over the age of 65 , and those with certain disabilities that have received Social Security benefits for 25 months , it would be very rare for Medicare to cover a circumcision . It would be possible , if someone with Medicare had a true medical need to be circumcisized later in the life , but very rare , as most circumcisions are done at birth . Given the fact that 40 % of births in American are covered by Medicaid , a better question may be `` Does Medicaid cover circumcisions ? '' That varies by state , as 18 states currently do not cover this procedure , primarily due to the fact that it is most often elective , or not necessary . the 18 states that do n't cover circumcisions , along with the year they stopped : Colorado 2011 South Carolina 2011 Louisiana 2005 Idaho 2005 Minnesota 2005 Maine 2004 Montana 2003 Utah 2003 Florida 2003 Missouri 2002 Arizona 2002 North Carolina 2002 California before 1999 North Dakota before 1999 Oregon before 1999 Mississippi before 1999 Nevada before 1999 Washington before 1999
Most likely Medicare will not pay for circumcision.Very few circumcisions are performed on adults . Medicare covers people over the age of 65 . Many health insurance plans will not cover ritual circumcision . It is viewed as an elective procedure . Some plans will cover the procedure if deemed medically necessary . A greater percentage of claims are paid when there is a medical diagnosis such as phimosis .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medicare Supplemental Plan F covers 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . Keep in mind , when you have Supplemental -LRB- AKA Medigap -RRB- Plans , Medicare is your primary insurance provider . For medically necessary procedures , Medicare Parts A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- and B -LRB- Doctors -RRB- provides good coverage , but still leaves folks on Medicare with a lot of out of pocket exposure . The Plan F pays for everything that Medicare does n't pay . However , if Medicare determines that the medical procedure you received was n't medically necessary , they wo n't pay anything nor will the Supplement Plan -LRB- regardless of who you get your supplemental plan with -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does Medicare As Secondary Cover ?
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
If you are still working and your employer allows you to stay on the group coverage and you are 65 and enroll into Medicare then your group insurance is primary and medicare is secondary . What if you have medicare and medicaid-medicare pays first . What if you have retired and you have coverage through the group plan-Medicare pays first . What if you are disabled but your spouse is still working and you are covered by the grou plan-if fewer than 100 employees - Medicare pays first-if more than 100 employees-the group plan pays first . What if you have End Stage Renal Disease-during the first 30 months the group plan pays first and medicare secondary ; afgter 30 months Medicare pays first and the group plan is secondary . If you have End Stage Renal Disease AND Cobra - first 30 months Cobra is primary and medicare is seondary and after first 30 months Medicare is primary and Cobra is secondary . If your case is not shown just ask if your case is preimary or secondary on the internet
No , Medicare is not always primary . If you are still working and have group coverage then Medicare could be secondary . If your employer has more than 20 employees then your Medicare would be secondary . In most cases , however , Medicare is primary . If you have a Medicare supplement , the supplement is secondary .
If you are talking about being covered by group health insurance and also covered by Medicare then it will depend upon the size of the employer group you are working for . If your employer has less than20 employees then Medicare is the primary payer -LRB- pays first -RRB- and the group health insurance pays in a secondary capacity . If your employer has more than 20 + employees then the group health insurance plan pays first and Medicare pays in a secondary capacity . This is the simplest and generally most common scenarios where this question comes up . However , there are numerous other situations a person may be in -LRB- eligible for Medicare and Medicaid , disabled , retired and still covered under a former employer 's plan , etc. -RRB- where other primary vs. secondary payer rules come into play that are too numerous to go into here . For more detailed information I would recommend that you go to Medicare.gov as they are an excellent resource for detailed information on the entire range of these issues .
Secondary market annuities offer fixed term payment streams from top quality insurance carriers . The high quality creditworthiness of the insurance carriers usually translates to lower returns to the investor , however secondary market annuities come with yields one to four percent higher than comparable assets . The term secondary market annuity has become an industry standard referring to a factored structured settlement , previously owned annuity or in-force annuity . Secondary market annuities offer all the benefits of the primary market , period certain , guaranteed yield annuity.Simply put , secondary market annuities offer higher returns without additional risk . Hope this Helps Tyson Wright SMA Hub , Inc. .
Supplemental/Medigap insurance plans offer affordable and comprehensive options in providing coverage to what Medicare does n't cover . When you have Supplemental/Medigap insurance coverage , Medicare is your primary insurer and the Supplemental/Medigap plan is your secondary insurer . There are several plans to choose from , with the Plan F being the most comprehensive in coverage . As long as Medicare pays their portion , the Plan F pays 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . The other plans vary in coverage , but less than 100 % .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA Benefits . One plan will be a secondary payer . Since the Veterans Administration benefits must be used at VA facilities , usually Medicare is secondary to the VA insurance . However , sometimes VA drug benefits are a good supplemental plan to Medicare , and thus becomes the secondary payer .
Yes , Medicare can be secondary to VA. . The two do not work together ; the VA only covers services provided at VA facilities and Medicare does not cover care provided at VA facilities . But if the VA approves care outside their providers , Medicare might cover it . As far as drug coverage goes , VA drug coverage does not have a premium and covers most or more than the drugs covered for Medicare Part D so there may not be a need for both plans if the VA is your primary provider .
For most persons , Medicare is your primary insurance . That means it is your coverage that pays first , up to the limits of benefits you have . If there are additional expenses that Medicare does not cover , you can have a secondary carrier that will pay some of those expenses . It is also possible for Medicare to be a secondary carrier . One example would be in specific instances where your employer -LRB- or spouse 's employer -RRB- provides healthcare coverage . Then , that coverage would pay first .
If your only health insurance plan is Medicare , then Medicare is primary . When you have a Medicare supplement plan , Medicare is primary and your Medigap plan is secondary . If you have coverage under an employer group health insurance plan , and the employer has fewer than 20 employees , Medicare is primary . If there are 20 or more employees , the group plan is primary and Medicare is secondary .
If you have group coverage you may not need to pick up Medicare part B right away depending on the size of your group . Medicare coordinates with your health insurance . For smaller groups it will be primary , for larger groups it would be secondary . Primary means that Medicare pays first and your health insurance would act like a supplement . Secondary means that your insurance pays first and Medicare would just help pay any deductibles and copay 's . You do not need a Medicare supplement if you have group health insurance in most cases . If you have prescriptions covered at work do not pick up a Medicare Advantage plan or prescription drug plan without discussing it with your HR rep. You could get knocked off your group coverage and not be able to get it back .
In most situations the answer to your question is based upon the size of the employer group . If the group has on average 20 or fewer employees then Medicare is the primary payer in a dual coverage situation -LRB- Medicare + group coverage -RRB- . If the group has more than 20 employees then the employer 's insurance coverage is in the primary pay position and Medicare is secondary . This covers the vast amount of situations . As with every government program there are other rules and thresholds that can apply in a variety of other situations to numerous to list here . One that may be encountered by some people is when they or a covered dependent become disabled . In that circumstance , for employers with an average of 99 or fewer employees then Medicare is the primary payer on that disabled person and the employer 's group plan is secondary . For more information or advice feel free to contact me .
An individual can have two health insurance plans at once , but they probably wo n't receive any additional benefits . The most common time this occurs is when a person is covered with their own employer 's insurance and also covered by their spouse 's policy . In this case , the insurance with their own employer would considered primary and the spouse 's policy would pay little to nothing . Another instance may be a person that retires from the military and gets insurance through their new employer . The individual would need to speak to the veteran 's affairs office for details on this situation . The final way a person may have two insurance plans is when they are covered by Medicare and a secondary insurance such as a Medicare Advantage plan . In this example , Medicare would be the primary insurance and pay approximately 80 % of medical costs . The secondary insurance would then go into effect and cover the remaining 20 % according to the rules of the individual policy .
Yes , you can generally have any number of health insurance plans you want . Several people have a primary and secondary health insurer . The secondary insurance typically covers health care costs that the primary insurance policy does not cover . If you do have two health insurance plans , you should be sure to make the health care provider well aware of this fact so they know to coordinate between the multiple insurers and bill accordingly .
In most cases , Medicare is primary and COBRA is secondary . But there are situations where your COBRA plan would be primary . If you are on Medicare as a result of ESRD -LRB- end stage renal disease -RRB- the role is reversed and COBRA is primary , Medicare secondary . You can review the Medicare publication `` Who Pays First '' for more detail .
There are specific situations where Medicare is secondary to a primary coverage plan . The most common one is when you , or your spouse , are covered under an employer group health insurance plan and that employer has 20 or more full time employees . The group plan is primary , Medicare secondary . The two plans coordinate . In most cases Medicare will pay little or nothing .
The factors that determine whether Medicare is primary or secondary are involved . E.g. For a business that has over 20 employees eligible for health insurance , Medicare is usually primary for those age 65 and older . If the business has under 20 employees , the employer 's plan is primary . You can go to this website to find out if Medicare is primary or secondary payer in your situation . WEBSITELINK . You could also call 1-800-MEDICARE to ask about specific situations .
A secondary beneficiary for life insurance is also called a contingent beneficiary . A secondary beneficiary is not the same as being the second primary beneficiary listed . If there is more than one primary beneficiary , the death benefit is split among the primary beneficiaries . A secondary , or contingent , beneficiary only receives the death benefit if all primary beneficiaries are deceased .
If you do not have group coverage or you work for a small employer then Medicare is primary and any other insurance is secondary . Larger employers group coverage would be primary and Medicare secondary . The cut off is 20 employees . More than 20 , group pays first , less than 20 Medicare pays first .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Legally Can A Licensed Agent Sell Life Insurance To Themselves ?
Yes . Life Insurance Agents can write a their ownLife Insurance Policy and recieve the commission . They get paid on their own policies . It 's no negative affect , and that is how the industry is structured to work . It 's like working at a car business and getting a free car to drive , working at a restaurant and getting a free meal , or even working for the airlines and getting free flights and trips .
Yes , a life insurance agent can sell a policy to themselves . They still must pay the same premium as anyone else of their age , build and health would pay . They can also sell to family members . Again , no agent can give a discount ; life insurance rates are set by the company .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Anyone who meets their state 's requirements to hold a life insurance license and gets appointed with at least one life insurer can sell life insurance . The question becomes : Can one have a practice in accounting while selling life insurance ? In many states , the answer is yes . Some states do not permit accounting or legal professionals to be active while also selling life insurance . You can be a CPA , not be active in accounting and sell life insurance .
Perhaps this question is best answered by the statistical averages gathered over the years by LIMRA -LRB- Life Insurance and Market Research Association -RRB- : - Only about 7 % of agents that sign on with a single insurance company remain with that company past the first five years . - The percentage that remains in the business after departing from their first insurance carrier is around 20 % and each year that percentage declines . - About 3 % of all individual sales representatives that enter the insurance business remain in the business for 20 years or more . - The average age of a life insurance agent today is about 57 years old.It has been said that if you can sell life insurance , you can sell anything . As a career , being a life insurance agent can be very rewarding , but it is highly unlikely that life insurance will be the only line of insurance you sell unless you become highly specialized and work with other advising financial professionals as a team in the high-net worth market . Otherwise , you will find it necessary to sell other lines of insurance , notably health , DI , Annuities , LTCi , or property-casualty insurance -LRB- auto , home , liability , etc. -RRB- to pay the bills.Sometimes , insurance agents become securities-licensed and obtain various professional designations that allow them to practice financial advisory services and sales of stocks , bonds , and mutual funds . This is a fairly recent trend and usually results in the sale of life insurance being a rare occurrence due to all of the other responsibilities of being a financial advisor.Perhaps the most rewarding thing about being a life insurance agent -LRB- or being licensed to sell life insruance , among other things -RRB- is being the person that `` delivers the check '' to the survivors of someone that died prematurely and on whom there was a high level of financial dependence .
Most basically a life insurance license is a license to sell life insurance . But you can think of it as a certificate issued by the State that certifies that the holder of the license has studied the laws governing life insurance and the practices involved , and has passed rigorous tests to verify that the person knows those laws and the serious consequences of violating them . The life insurance license makes the person eligible to be appointed by life insurance companies to sell their fixed life insurance and annuity products . THen the licensed person has to learn all about the products the company offers before they can actually sell them .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
Yes , you do need a license to sell life insurance in Maine . If selling products that do not involve securities , the license is simply called a Life Insurance Producer 's License issued by the Maine Department of Insurance . It requires passing an exam and paying fees to get that type of license . Selling variable products also require a couple of securities licenses .
Variable life insurance is another form of whole life insurance . There is no special license needed . As long as you have a license to sell life insurance you would be able to sell variable life . Which license you need to sell life insurance varies state to state . In my state of Florida all you need is a 2-15 or a 2-14 license .
Entering business without appropriate liability insurance can result in financial consequences that will dwarf the premium that would be required to have coverage . Just because he is 16 years old will not relieve him of the financial responsibility in the event of an occurrence where someone is injured or property is damaged . I do n't buy into the notion that insurance gives a business credibility but I do agree that it is the best single method of protecting assets and the future ability to earn a living . At 16 years old , another issue develops and that is whether or not he meets legal requirements to start or open a business or can entered into contracts . And , because your son is not of a legal age , will his parents or legal guardian be responsible for any losses that occur in the operation of the business ? If a case can be made for the inclusion of parents or guardians into a claim or lawsuit , the stakes just went up dramatically . So , insurance is a minimum necessity . One other thought . Insurance carriers may not insure your son because of his age , but they are more likely to concern themselves with the combination of his age and lack of business experience . Many carriers having the best rates have the requirement of at least a few years of experience . While coverage may be available in a specialty insurance marketplace , our best carriers will generally have issues with a 16 year old new business customer first entering and insuring a business . Once again , a parent might be necessary to make the business insurance happen . But back to your question : Absolutely a yes on the need for insurance . Good luck .
The requirements to be a health insurance brokerwill vary from state to state . Generally there will be a specified number of hours of training , generally in a classroom setting though online training is becoming more accepted , that a person will have to complete before they will be allowed to take their state 's insurance exam . The applicant must successfully complete their state 's Life & Health Insurance exam before they can become a licensed insurance and legally engage in the sale of life and health insurance products . You should also expect to be required to have Errors & Omissions Insurance either by your state or by most , if not all , of the insurance carriers whose products you will want to sell . Completing these steps will then get you to the stage where you are technically trained and legal to sell life and health insurance products , However , this does n't mean that you will really have anything but the most superficial knowledge of the life and health insurance industries and the basic rules of the road . After that your real education begins and will have to continue throughout your career as the Life and Health Insurance business is multifaceted and constantly changing . This has never been more true than now in the era of health care reform .
Yes , a life insurance agent can sell a policy to themselves . They still must pay the same premium as anyone else of their age , build and health would pay . They can also sell to family members . Again , no agent can give a discount ; life insurance rates are set by the company .
You can buy annuities from Life insurance agents who sell them . If the annuity you are seeking to purchase is a variable annuity , you will need to do business with an agent who has securities licenses that allow him/her to sell them . Non-variable -LRB- fixed or indexed -RRB- annuities do not require a securities license to sell them , just a Life insurance license .
No it is not a legal requirement . Many lenders however will require mortgage life insurance to protect themselves . Also , there have been cases where a judge has required a divorced spouse to carry life insurance to cover a mortgage or protect minor children although these cases would depend on the situation . As a general rule however , you are not legally required to carry mortgage insurance .
Yes you need a license to sell life insurance in the state of New York . To get this license you must first complete New York 's pre-licensing requirements . These requirements are pre-licensing class , or online course work offered by a NYS Department of Insurance approved vendor . Once this requirement is completed you can take the licensing exam . You will also be subject to a background check . Once you 've completed these items you will be licensed as a life insurance producer and you will be able to sell life insurance in the state of New York .
To sell fixed annuities the agent needs to be licensed in life insurance . A licensed life agent can also sell indexed annuities . The exception would be if the agent was facilitating the purchase of the fixed annuity with existing stocks , bonds or mutual funds owned by the annuity applicant . In that situation , the agent would need some additional securities licenses to handle the sale .
A life insurance license is what gives you the right to sell life insurance . Life insurance licenses are governed by state regulators . You must take educational courses and pass an exam to get your license . There are fees to pay and conduct codes to meet , then you must take continuing education to keep your license . If you want to sell life insurance in more than one state , you must get a license in each state .
To sell disability insurance , you will need to have a health insurance agent license . Some states may also ask for you to have a life license as well so I would recommend checking with your brokerage you have your contracts through or contact the carrier directly to speak with someone in the agent services department to get an answer for a specific carrier and/or state . Please note , many states charge the same fees whether you 're getting a health license only or both life and health . I would recommend getting your life license as well even if you do n't primarily sell life insurance because you never know if there is an opportunity for a life insurance sale on top of the health insurance sale . Just my two cents on the question . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
